A Reduction of Input/Output Logics to SAT
Abstract
Deontic logics are formalisms for reasoning over norms, obligations, permissions and prohibitions. Input/Output (I/O) Logics are a particular family of so-called norm-based deontic logics that formalize conditional norms outside of the underlying object logic language, where conditional norms do not carry a truth-value themselves. In this paper, an automation approach for I/O logics is presented that makes use of suitable reductions to (sequences of) propositional satisfiability problems. A prototypical implementation, named rio (reasoner for input/output logics), of the proposed procedures is presented and applied to illustrative examples.
keywords:
automated reasoning; normative reasoning; input/output logic; non-monotonic reasoning; reduction to SAT1 Introduction
Representation of and reasoning with norms, obligations, permissions and prohibitions is addressed by the field of deontic logic (Gabbay et al., 2013). It studies reasoning patterns and logical properties that are not suitably captured by classical propositional or first-order logic. Various logic formalisms have been proposed to handle deontic and normative reasoning, including systems based on modal logics (von Wright, 1951), dyadic deontic logic (Gabbay et al., 2013), and norm-based systems (Hansen, 2014). These systems differ in the properties of the obligation operator, and in their ability to consistently handle deontic paradoxes and/or norm conflicts (Gabbay et al., 2013).
Input/Output (I/O) logics (Makinson & van der Torre, 2000) are a particular norm-based family of systems in which conditional norms are represented by pairs of formulas. The pairs do not carry truth-values themselves. I/O logics use an operational semantics based on detachment and come with a variety of different systems, formalized by different so-called output operators. Given a set of conditional norms , and a set of formulas describing the situational context , output operators produce a set of formulas that represent the obligations that are in force for that context. In order to check whether some state of affairs is obligatory, it suffices to check whether , where is some output operator.
Unconstrained I/O logics are monotone and cannot consistently handle norm conflicts (i.e., situations in which norms with conflicting obligations are in force) without entailing arbitrary conclusions (including falsehood). A generalization of I/O logics, denoted constrained I/O logics (Makinson & van der Torre, 2001), addresses these shortcomings and provides a framework for non-monotonic normative reasoning. There are strong connections to default logics, conditional logics and logics for counterfactuals. For instance, Poole systems (Poole, 1988) can be viewed a special case of constrained I/O logics, and normal Reiter defaults (Reiter, 1980) are closely related to them (Makinson & van der Torre, 2001).
The use of I/O logics for legal reasoning has been proposed by Boella and van der Torre (2004). The legal knowledge base DAPRECO uses a first-order variant of I/O logics and extensively encodes the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) of the European Union (Robaldo et al., 2020). Automated reasoning within knowledge bases such as DAPRECO constitutes a prototypical application scenario of computer-assisted normative reasoning and is of high interest to both academic and industrial stakeholders. However, currently there exist only few automated reasoning procedures for I/O logics (see related work below).
The decision problem whether is referred to as entailment problem. This is the decision problem studied in the literature. In this article a generalization called the output problem is studied: Given a set of norms and an input , compute a finite representation of formulas (called a basis) such that . In other words, the entailment problems ask whether a given formula can be detached in a situation under a set of norms, and the output problem generates (a finite representation of) the set of all entailed formulas. The entailment problem for can easily be solved once a basis of the output is found by checking whether (using some standard deduction method). The other way around is, however, not as clear and remains an open question.111In general, the output set contains formulas that are themselves not occurring in any norm in , so a simple syntactical search is not sufficient.
One research hypothesis of this work is that both the entailment problem and the output problem are useful in practice and somewhat orthogonal: If an agent faces a new situation, a list of obligations can be generated to guide the agent’s next actions. If, on the other hand, only the entailment problem is available, the agent would need to guess for most plausible obligations in force, and check their entailment one after one, possibly missing an important one. After the initial situation has been assessed by the agent, entailment procedures seem most useful to check for compliance of potential individual follow-up actions.
This work aims to provide automation for different I/O logic formalisms wrt. the output problem. To that end, a reduction of I/O logic reasoning to the satisfiability decision problem (SAT) in propositional logic (Biere et al., 2021) is given and an implementation of the resulting procedures within the reasoner rio is presented.
The contributions of this work are as follows:
-
•
A novel SAT-based reduction for unconstrained and constrained I/O logic reasoning is presented. Overall, I/O logic reasoning with eight output operators is supported, as well as 16 constrained I/O logic reasoning set-ups.222Some these set-ups are semantically equivalent, see Sect. 2 for a discussion. Up to the author’s knowledge, this work constitutes the first automated reasoning procedure for unconstrained and constrained I/O logics wrt. the output problem.
-
•
Previous work of the author (Steen, 2021) is simplified and generalized so that a finite representation of the whole output set is computed (see below for a brief discussion on this). This allows the simple automation of more general output operators, discussed in the literature (Parent & van der Torre, 2014).
-
•
A knowledge representation format for automated reasoning in I/O logics is presented. This format is aligned with the well-established TPTP standard (Sutcliffe, 2017) for automated reasoning systems, in particular it instantiates the TPTP extension to non-classical logics formalisms (Steen et al., 2022; Steen & Sutcliffe, 2024).
-
•
An open-source implementation of the presented reasoning procedures is presented. The automated reasoning system is called rio (Steen, 2026), and reads problems and outputs results according to the TPTP standard.
In Sect. 2 the basic notions of I/O logics are introduced. Sect. 3 gives reductions of the different output operators to SAT, and Sect. 5 presents an implementation of the SAT-based reasoning procedures. In Sect. 6 the automation methods are applied to a small case study. Finally, Sect. 7 concludes and sketches further work.
Related work.
The idea of reducing entailment in I/O logics to classical entailment is not new. A so-called relabelling technique that reduces the entailment problem for and to classical logic entailments is presented by Makinson & van der Torre (2000) in their original I/O logic article. While this original reduction provides a more direct (and efficient) approach for the entailment problem for these output operators, it is unclear how to generalize to constrained I/O reasoning, or for application to the output problem. The relabelling approach for the entailment problem was extended to and by Ciabattoni & Rozplokhas (2023).
Ciabattoni & Rozplokhas (2023) present proof-search-oriented sequent calculi for so-called causal input/output logics, and then present a simple connection to the original I/O logics via an additional entailment check in classical logic. This work focuses on the entailment problem and only on unconstrained I/O logics. Lellmann (2021) presents sequent calculi aligning the entailment problem in I/O logics to a fragment of conditional logics. This approach was implemented in Prolog.
Benzmüller et al. (2019) present a shallow semantical embedding for two unconstrained I/O logic operations into classical higher-order logic. They make use of the fact that the output operators and , cf. Sect. 2, can be represented by adequate translations to modal logics K and KT. Such an approach is not available for the remaining output operators as well as all for the constrained I/O logics setting.
An oracle-based non-deterministic algorithm for the entailment problem in constrained I/O logic is presented by Sun & Robaldo (2017). The author is not aware of any implementation, though.
Robaldo (2021) models reified I/O logics (Robaldo & Sun, 2017), an enriched version of the formalism used in this paper, in the recent W3C Shapes Constraint Language (SHACL) (W3C, 2017) for reasoning with the W3C RDFs/OWL standard language for the Semantic Web (W3C, 2012).
Earlier work of the author addresses ”single-shot” reasoning procedures for unconstrained I/O logics (Steen, 2021) which seem unfit for generalization to the constrained case. In particular, these reasoning procedures only allow for the computation whether a given formula is output by an (unconstrained) output operator. The generalized approach presented here computes a finite representation of the infinite output set.
A framework for flexible automated normative reasoning, bridging between the well-established normative and legal knowledge representation standard LegalRuleML (Athan et al., 2015) and the TPTP standard (Sutcliffe, 2017) for automated theorem provers, has been developed by Steen and Fuenmayor (2022). The automation procedures for I/O logics presented here can be seamlessly integrated into that framework, enriching it by I/O logic reasoning capacities.
The author is not aware of any related work wrt. the output problem as defined further above, and on automation of constrained I/O logics.
2 Input/Output Logic
I/O logics were introduced by Makinson and van der Torre (2000; 2001) as a formalism for the abstract study of conditional norms, e.g., obligations constituted by some normative code. In the I/O formalism, inputs are mapped to outputs with respect to a normative system using so-called output operators. Intuitively, inputs describe the situational context and the outputs are factual obligations in the given context. The output operators differ in their detachment properties.
Two I/O logics settings are considered: Every operator’s output can be used as-is; this is also referred to as unconstrained I/O logics (Makinson & van der Torre, 2000). In constrained I/O logics, instead, additional constraints may be imposed on the output such that it is guaranteed to be consistent with the constraints (Makinson & van der Torre, 2001). Constrained I/O logics are non-monotonic, and allow for defeasible reasoning with conflicting obligations (deontic dilemmas) as well as norm violations (contrary-to-duty scenarios).
The most important notions are summarized in the following, with material from the relevant literature (Parent & van der Torre, 2003) and partly adopted from earlier work of the author Steen (2021). Since the I/O logics formalisms are not widely known and might seem counter-intuitive in the beginning, the subsequent introduction is supported by a few examples.
2.1 Unconstrained I/O Logics
Let be the language of classical propositional logic over some set of propositional symbols with the usual connectives , and for negation, conjunction and disjunction, respectively. The symbols and represent some arbitrary tautology and contradiction, respectively. Furthermore let denote the consequence relation of classical propositional logic, i.e., for all and it holds that if and only if is a semantical consequence of . The set of consequences is defined as .
Syntax.
A normative system is a set of pairs of formulas.333In the literature the formulas are usually referred to as for inputs and for outputs. This is also adopted here. A pair represents the conditional norm that given , it ought to be . By convention, given a norm the first element is also referred to as the body of , denoted , and the second element is referred to as the head of , denoted . Let furthermore for some , and analogous for . If is a set of formulas, the image of , written as , is given by . Given a normative system and a set of formulas , denotes the output of input under where is an output operator. It is assumed in the following that and are finite sets.
Semantics.
The semantics of I/O logics is operational in the sense that the meaning of normative concepts is given by generating outputs with respect to a normative system and an input by detachment. The four distinct output operators , , studied in the literature are defined as follows (Makinson & van der Torre, 2000):
where is called complete iff or is a maximally consistent set.444A clarification might be in order: The set in the definition of is defined to be a least superset of that is closed both under and . This also applies to the set in the definition of , but the definition can be simplified as for every complete set .
, called simple-minded, mainly illustrates the basic machinery of detachment underlying the output operators. is called basic and augments the simple-minded output with reasoning by cases. and are referred to as reusable and basic reusable, respectively, and extend the former operators with iterative detachment, i.e., the respective output is exhaustively recycled as input.
Unconstrained I/O logic reasoning with and is shown to be coNP-complete by Sun and Robaldo 2017, was recently shown to be coNP-complete as well (Ciabattoni & Rozplokhas, 2023).
Example 2.1.
Let and let and . The following outputs are generated using the different output operators:
-
1.
-
2.
-
3.
-
4.
-
5.
Note that in every case it holds that . Also, the output set of every I/O operation is infinite as the set of consequences contains at least the formulas , , , …, etc.
For every output operator a throughput-variant of , denoted , may be defined by where (Makinson & van der Torre, 2000). Throughput operators forward the input to the output set, in addition to the usual output generated by its underlying output operator, i.e., if then . It is known that and collapse to classical logic (Makinson & van der Torre, 2001). Together with the four principal output operators above, there hence exist seven distinct output operations in total.
It is important to note that whereas a conditional norm looks similar to an implication , the output semantics is quite different: As an example, assume and . In this case all output operators yield . In particular , while an analogous encoding as implication on the object logic level entails that . An interpretation as material implication can be modeled in I/O logics by using, e.g., the output operator (Makinson & van der Torre, 2000). The operational approach of I/O logics allows for a more fine-grained control over detached obligations. This is particularly important in the presence of norm violations where a representation using material implications leads to inconsistencies.555Consider the normative system , where stands for killing someone. The norm expresses the (unconditional) obligation not to kill anyone. Consider a situation where this obligation has been violated, i.e., . It follows that , but .
Makinson and van der Torre (2000) provide a syntactic characterization of the different output operators in terms of derivation rules. They are not discussed here as they do not provide effective means for automation, in particular (1) they do not allow backward proof search (as done in most contemporary automated reasoning systems) and (2) they only derive the fact that some specific formula is in the output set (as opposed to describing the whole output set as done in this work).
2.2 Constrained I/O Logics
Constrained I/O logic (Makinson & van der Torre, 2001) extends unconstrained I/O logic with a notion of additional constraints that outputs must to be consistent with. This enables the I/O formalism to consistently handle deontic paradoxes such as norm violations and deontic dilemmas (Gabbay et al., 2013). To that end, a fundamental technique from belief change (Fermé & Hansson, 2018) is adapted, as used in, e.g., so-called contraction operations: The set of norms is restricted just enough that consistency of the output with the constraints is guaranteed. Of course there exist multiple accordingly restricted sets in general, and each such set potentially generates a different output set.
Let be a set of formulas called constraints. The notions of maxfamilies and outfamilies wrt. some output operator are defined as follows:666The reference to the output operator occurring as subscript in the terms and is usually omitted in the literature. In the following, it is explicitly stated as clarification.
Intuitively, a formalizes the concept of maximal choices of norms from such that output generated using that set is consistent with . An simply maps norm sets to their respective output set, i.e., detached outputs via consistent with .
Example 2.2 (Contrary-to-duty).
The so-called Chisholm paradox is a well-known contrary-to-duty scenario in the deontic logic community (Chisholm, 1963). Consider three norms where and stand for helping your neighbor and telling him/her that you come over, respectively. The set represents following norms: you ought to help your neighbor, if you help your neighbor, then you ought to tell him/her that you are coming over, and if you don’t help your neighbor, then you ought to not tell him/her that you come over, respectively. Furthermore assume that .
For it holds that , i.e., unconstrained I/O logic produces an inconsistent output set. Now consider the constraint .777In the context of norm violations, the constraints represent facts that are undeniably true and cannot be changed. The output operator is constrained to only output obligations that are consistent with the constraints, e.g., in order to compute what other obligations are in force even if others have already been violated. For a thorough discussion on the choice of constraints in scenarios of norm violation see, e.g., (Hansson, 1969). It follows that and hence for .
In constrained I/O logic, the output is generated from outfamilies (i.e., sets of sets of formulas) by aggregate functions. Two options are discussed in the literature: When assuming so-called credulous output, denoted , the join of all elements is returned, i.e., . In skeptical output, denoted , all common output formulas are returned, i.e., .888The remark of footnote 6 also applies to the reference to in the term . The terms credulous and skeptical indicate that the latter variant is more restrictive than the former (or ”more cautious” when generating outputs resp. obligations).
Example 2.3 (Contrary-to-duty, continued).
Let , and be as in Example 2.2. For it holds that , in particular . This means that constrained I/O logic consistently infers that, in the given situation you ought not to tell your neighbor that you’re coming over. Note that obligations that are in violation with the situation (but, in principle, still in force) are not in the output set.
Constrained I/O logic is non-monotonic and allows for defeasible reasoning (Makinson & van der Torre, 2001). This is an important capability of reasoning formalisms in the context of, among others, normative reasoning, learning, and multi-agent systems with incomplete knowledge and/or fallible perception (Fermé & Hansson, 2018; Gabbay et al., 2013). Credulous and skeptical constrained I/O logics reasoning with all the introduced output operators is -complete and -complete, respectively (Sun & Robaldo, 2017) (that is, on the second level of the polynomial hierarchy, and , respectively).
Constrained I/O logic has no known proof theory (Parent & van der Torre, 2003, Sect. 5.5).
3 Reductions to SAT
Reductions of the output problem in unconstrained and constrained I/O logic reasoning to a sequence of SAT problems is given. The main idea is to represent the (infinite) output set of an I/O logic output operator by a finite set of representatives. Let be a set of formulas. A finite base of is a finite set of formulas such that each formula of is entailed by it, i.e., for each . With the goal of logic automation in mind, the output problem instances considered in this work are assumed to be finite in the following sense: The vocabulary of (i.e., set of propositional atoms) is finite, and both the input and the set of norms are finite. In this setting, it is guaranteed that finite bases for the (deductively closed) output sets always exist. The construction of the bases is reduced to procedures that use SAT decisions as subroutines. Once a basis is constructed, checking whether a formula is entailed by it (and hence in the output set) can again be decided by a SAT problem. In the following, denotes the SAT problem of showing unsatisfiability of .
3.1 Reductions for and
Output of the operators and is given by single-step and iterative detachment, respectively. The common detachment machinery is formalized by directly triggered norms:
Definition 3.1 (Directly Triggered Norm).
Let be a conditional norm. Input directly triggers , written , if and only if .
For any it holds that iff . The basis of a simple-minded output via , denoted , is then defined as:
It is easy to see that is indeed a finite basis of :
Theorem 3.2.
if and only if .
Proof.
It holds that . By definition of the assertion follows directly. ∎
For reusable output the basis contains every norm’s head that can be detached by iterating direct triggering. This is similar to calculating the so-called bulk increments (Stolpe, 2008), with the difference that bulk increments are closed under and are hence not finite. More formally, let , , be a family of sets of formulas:
Because is monotone the are totally ordered with respect to set inclusion, i.e., for every . Also is bound from above by . It follows that there exists a maximal element within that chain, in particular there exists some such that . We set .
Theorem 3.3.
if and only if .
Proof.
Assume . Since and are monotone, it holds that where is the least superset of that is closed both under and . Then, because of compactness and by definition of , there exists some such that and thus .
Conversely, if then for some . So there exists a subset of norms such that and . It holds that for every set that is closed both under and , and hence . ∎
Construction of bases.
The construction of is done via the procedure that lifts the notion of a directly triggered norm to sets of norms by filtering as follows:
Finally we set
This amounts to a sequence of SAT problems.
The computational construction of the basis uses a fixed-point iteration. For each let be the subset of all norms that are directly triggered by , where is the augmented input after each iteration. Initially, and let . Calculating amounts to at most SAT problems. As soon as for some , a fixed point has been found and . This procedure is displayed in Fig. 1. Here, the incremental sets and are represented by the variables A’ and N’, respectively. The convergence criterion is slightly rewritten to avoid redundant computations: Firstly, the variable T collects norms that are newly triggered by A’ in the respective iteration. Only newly triggered norms have to be collected in , as the norms in N’ were already triggered before. If no new norms can be detached (i.e., ) the loop terminates.
The computation of requires individual SAT problems in the worst case: Consider a normative system , , where each norm is directly triggered by , . In this case, in every iteration, SAT problems are generated, , finally converging to a fixed point after iterations.
3.2 Reductions for and
Finite bases for basic output are defined on top of a generalized notion of norm triggering, called weakly triggered norms. Recall that augments simple-minded output with reasoning by cases, which makes norm triggering not only dependent on the input but also on the existence of other norms in . Consider . For any it holds that because is a tautology and hence, by definition, is in the output set.
Definition 3.4 (Weakly Triggered Set of Norms).
Let be a normative system and with . Input weakly triggers , written , if and only if
The weak output generated by is given by .
Intuitively, if a set of norms is weakly triggered by some input , then at least one norm in can indeed be detached by but it is unknown which one (following the reasoning by cases approach of basic output). In the above example it holds that and . If is weakly triggered by , then so is any superset . Moreover, if and where , then . In the example above, it holds that and . In particular .
Consider another scenario: Let and let . Neither nor is entailed by , but . In particular, contains elements that are not head of any norm from . However, it holds that , and , which is exactly the desired output.
Note that every directly triggered norm also forms a weakly triggered singleton set by definition. Furthermore, if the input is inconsistent then every singleton subset of is weakly triggered. In general, there may be many different weakly triggered sets in .
is then defined as follows:
Theorem 3.5.
if and only if .
Proof.
Assume . For every complete extension of there exist norms , , such that and . Then
is entailed by all complete extensions . Also, entails (1) because every interpretation that satisfies also satisfies some complete extension , and by construction each complete extension entails at least one disjunct of (1). By exhaustive rewriting an equivalent formula in conjunctive normal form is obtained:
where and is the number of clauses. By construction , for each . Since for every complete extension this set contains at least one norm (directly) triggered by it, it holds that . Since for every complete extension of it follows that as desired.
For the converse direction, let . By definition, for some sets of norms such that , it holds that . As each is weakly triggered by A, it holds that for every complete extension of . Since the extensions are complete, for each there exists some such that . Thus, for a fixed complete extension , it holds that and, since , also . As every weak output is output by every complete , it follows that . ∎
Alternatively, the task of constructing the basis of can be reduced to finding the minimal weakly triggered sets. A set , , is called minimally weakly triggered by , written , iff and for any proper non-empty subset it is not the case that .
In the above construction, we can restrict ourselves to minimally weakly triggered sets without loss of generality as they entail each output of every non-minimally weakly triggered superset:
Theorem 3.6.
∎
For basic reusable output , as shown by Makinson and van der Torre, the output set can be characterized using and so-called materialization Makinson & van der Torre (2000):
Lemma 3.7.
For each normative system and input it holds that , where is the materialization of given by . ∎
Following this alternative representation, the basis for is defined as:
Corollary 3.8.
if and only if . ∎
Construction of bases.
The computational construction of is more involved than for simple-minded and reusable output. To that end, weakly triggered sets are related with the well-known notion of minimal unsatisfiable subsets:
Definition 3.9 (Minimal unsatisfiable subset).
Let be an unsatisfiable set of formulas. A subset is a minimal unsatisfiable subset (MUS) of if and only if is unsatisfiable and any proper subset of is satisfiable.
MUSes play an important role in many contexts such as model checking (Ghassabani et al., 2017), requirement analysis (Barnat et al., 2016; Bendík, 2017) and software and hardware assessment (Han & Lee, 1999; Stuckey et al., 2003). Whereas SAT solvers usually compute only whether a given set of formulas is satisfiable or unsatisfiable (including certificates that substantiate this claim), MUS enumeration tools extend this functionality by providing means to extract the concrete MUSes that cause the initial set of formulas to be unsatisfiable. In the given context, MUSes provide a specific minimal choice of norms that are weakly triggered by . Let denote the complementation (element-wise negation) of a set of formulas.
Lemma 3.10.
Let be a subset of norms, some input, and let . It holds that
-
1.
if then is a MUS of for some , and
-
2.
if, for some , is a MUS of , then .
Proof.
For (1): If then is a tautology. It follows that is unsatisfiable, and hence as well. Since is minimally weakly triggered, is a MUS for some .
For (2): If is a MUS of it directly follows that . Since is monotone, holds as well. ∎
Note that not every MUS corresponds to a minimally weakly triggered set of norms, but only a (non-minimally) weakly triggered one.999Thanks to an (anonymous) reviewer who pointed this out. A simple example is as follows: Let and . Then, the set given by
is unsatisfiable, and has the following two MUSes:
Whereas both (using input as witness) and (using input as witness), only the first MUS corresponds to a minimally weakly triggered set, i.e., . If, however, not all MUSes are considered, but only those MUSes with -minimal , the correspondence can be established. For the results of this work, this asymmetry does not matter.
Well-developed MUS enumeration and extraction approaches (Belov & Marques-Silva, 2012; Bacchus & Katsirelos, 2016; Bendík et al., 2018; Narodytska et al., 2018; Bendík & Černá, 2020) can be used to construct by enumerating all the MUSes, and to reconstruct the weakly triggered sets of norms. The procedure implements this as follows:
where is defined as in Lemma 3.10 above, and is some subset of the input. Finally we set . In the worst case there are exponentially many MUSes, so enumerating all of them can take exponentially many SAT calls.
3.3 Reductions for throughput operators
The bases of the output sets produced by the throughput variants can be constructed using the results from above and identities from the literature.
The throughput operators and based on simple-minded and reusable output, respectively, can be reduced to their non-throughput variants. Similarly, the basic output and basic reusable output operators collapse into classical logic:
Lemma 3.11 ((Makinson & van der Torre, 2001)).
Let be a set of conditional norms, and .
-
•
For it holds that .
-
•
For it holds that . ∎
Construction of bases.
Let denote the base of , for . It is given by:
Theorem 3.12.
if and only if , for . ∎
In the cases of the bases are hence given by augmenting the non-throughput bases with the input; for they are simply given by the classical materialization.
3.4 Reduction for constrained output
The reduction of constrained I/O logic reasoning to SAT builds upon the procedures for generating a finite basis for the underlying (unconstrained) output set. Recall that in constrained I/O logic outputs are generated by aggregating over a family of output sets that are consistent with the given constraints. The selection of the appropriate sets of norms can, again, be determined by SAT.
For a given normative system , input and set of constraints , the generation procedure of with respect to an output operator , , is displayed in Fig. 2. The procedure yields -maximal subsets of such that satisfiable. By Theorems 3.2, 3.3, 3.5 and 3.8 this is equivalent to asserting consistency with respect to the output generated by . In Fig. 2 the set collects unprocessed sets of norms that still have to be checked for consistent output, while collects norm sets for which consistent output has already been asserted. The variable used in the body of the loop acts as temporary storage. If consistency of (with respect to ) can be established, is added to and contained in the . If, in contrast, the output of under is inconsistent with , all -subsets of (i.e., subsets that have one element less) are inserted into for subsequent assessment. The procedure terminates as is finite and only has finitely many subsets, and the subsets added to are monotonously decreasing in cardinality. is represented by a collection of finite bases, i.e., by . Finite bases of and are generated by computing the join and meet of the individual bases, respectively.
In the worst case, every subset of needs to be checked individually for consistent output in Fig. 2, i.e., when every singleton subset of yields inconsistent output. This requires SAT queries in the worst case; reflecting the very cost-intensive nature of constrained I/O logic reasoning, being -complete resp. -complete (Sun & Robaldo, 2017).
The procedure in Fig. 2 is mainly for illustrative purposes, and it can be optimized to utilize more sophisticated techniques such as MaxSAT-based enumeration of minimal correction sets (Liffiton & Sakallah, 2009; Morgado et al., 2012), i.e., sets of formulas whose removal will make the set of formulas satisfiable. Of course, the theoretical worst-case complexity remains the same in any case; still this would yield a more effective procedure in practice. The technical details are omitted here for brevity.
3.5 Reductions for other extensions
Recall that, for some output operator , collects all the subsets of norms of whose output under is consistent with , and that collects the respective sets of outputs. An output is then produced by aggregating those sets into a single output set (called the net output by Makinson and van der Torre), e.g., by credulous output (union) or skeptical output (intersection). A natural generalization of producing the output is then the following: Let be the generalized net output operator defined as follows:
where is a set of norms, is an input, is a set of constraints, and some output operator. Furthermore, is a selection function on sets of norm sets, and an aggregation function.
Credulous and skeptical output are simply simulated by letting be set union resp. set intersection, and the identity function.
There exist a notable generalization of constrained I/O logics where preference orderings (transitive-reflexive relations) between conditional norms are employed for generating a family of preferred (wrt. ) maximal subsets of and respective output families (Parent, 2011).
For some set of constraints , some lifting of to sets of norms, output operator and aggregation function , the definition of preferred output is given by:
can be reformulated in terms of as follows:
where is the function uniquely determined by that gives the -maximal subsets of a given set of norm sets.
Further selection functions can be studied in this context, e.g., selecting largest or smallest members of the maxfamily, or only those members that do (or do not) contain some specific norm, etc. Likewise, further aggregation functions can be studied wrt. .
Computing can integrated in the overall automation framework in a straight-forward way, and hence extensions such as preferred output as defined above. The pseudo-code for this procedure is displayed in Fig. 3.101010Note that it is assumed that both and are computable. Essentially, calculating first calculates the base of the respective maxfamily, then only those members as selected by are retained, and then the computation proceeds as usual by computing the respective finite bases of the selected sets, returning the net output as defined by .
The computation of has been implemented in rio, as illustrated for the case of preferred output in the case study in Sec. 6.
4 TPTP Representation
rio is aligned with the TPTP standards. The TPTP (Thousands of Problems for Theorem Proving) library and infrastructure (Sutcliffe, 2017) is the core platform for the development and evaluation of contemporary automated theorem proving (ATP) systems. It provides (i) a comprehensive collection of benchmark problems for ATP systems; (ii) a set of tools for problem and solution inspection, pre- and post-processing, and verification; and (iii) a comprehensive syntax standard for ATP system input and output, including result reporting. The connection to the TPTP infrastructure is chosen as TPTP is the predominant standard for classical ATP systems, and its comprehensive syntax standards already support future (planned) extesions of rio to quantified logics. Even more, this allows for the integration of I/O logic reasoning with other (classical and non-classical) TPTP-compliant reasoning tools. The brief TPTP introduction below is adapted from earlier work (Steen & Sutcliffe, 2024).
4.1 TPTP Preliminaries.
The TPTP specifies different ATP system languages varying in their expressivity. In this work we focus on the typed first-order form (TFF), a syntax standard for many-sorted first-order logic (Sutcliffe et al., 2012), All input formats are in ASCII plain text, human-readable and follow Prolog language conventions for simple parsing. An ATP problem generally consists of type declarations, contextual definitions and premises of the reasoning task (usually referred to as axioms), and a conjecture that is to be proved or refuted in the given context. The core building block of the ATP problem files in TPTP languages are so-called annotated formulas of form …
language(name,role,formula[,source[,annotations]]).
Here, language is a three-letter identifier for the language format, here tff.
The name is a unique identifier for the annotated formula
but has no other effect on the interpretation of it. The role field specifies whether the formula should be interpreted
as an assumption (role axiom), a type declaration (role type), a definition (role definition) or as
a formula to be proved (role conjecture). The formula is an ASCII representation of the respective logical
expression, where predicate and function symbols are denoted by strings that begin with a lower-case letter,
variables are denoted by strings starting with an upper-case letter, the logical connectives
, , , , are represented by ~, &, |
, => and <=>, respectively.
Quantifiers and are expressed by ! and ?, respectively, followed by a list of
variables bound by it. The TPTP defines several interpreted symbols starting with a $-sign,
including logical constants such as $true and $false for truth and falsehood, respectively.
The type $i is the type of individuals and $o is the type of Booleans.
Explicit types of symbols may be dropped. In this case, default types of symbols are assumed
as specified by the TPTP standard as follows: If a symbol c occurs at term position with applied arguments
the default type of c is ($i * … * $i) > $i, representing the type of a -ary
function symbol. If a symbol c occurs at formula position with applied arguments
the default type of c is ($i * … * $i) > $o, representing the type of a -ary
predicate symbol. Arguments are applied using parentheses as in
f(a,b)
, where f
is some function symbol, and a
and b
are some terms (of appropriate type).
Finally, the source and annotations are optional and uninterpreted extra-logical information that can be assigned to the
annotated formula, e.g., about its origin, its relevance, or other properties.
An example formula in TFF format is as follows:
tff(union_def, axiom, ! [S, T, X]: ( member(X, union(S,T)) <=> ( member(X, S) | member(X, T) ) ), source(’definitions.ax’), [relevance(1.0)]).
In this example, a TFF annotated formula of name union_def is given that describes an axiom giving a fundamental property of set union and some auxiliary information about it. A complete description of the TPTP input languages, including the syntax BNF, is provided at the TPTP web page111111http://tptp.org. For further information about available tools, problems sets and an extensive description of the different languages, we refer to the literature (Sutcliffe, 2017).
TPTP traditionally focused on classical logic.
Only recently, TPTP formats were extended towards non-classical logics as well (Steen et al., 2022).
For this purpose, the TFF language has been extended with expressions
of the form …
{connective_name} @ (arg1,…,argn),
where connective_name is either a TPTP-defined name (starting with a $ sign)
or a user-defined name (starting with two $ signs) for a non-classical operator, and
the argi are terms or formulas to which the operator is applied. TPTP-defined connectives
have a fixed meaning and are documented by the TPTP; the interpretation of user-defined connectives is provided by third-party systems, environments, or documentation. The so enriched TPTP language is denoted NXF (non-classical extended first-order form).
As second new component, non-classical NXF adds logic specifications
to the language. They are annotated formulas of form …
tff(name, logic, logic_name == [options] ).
where logic is the new TPTP role, logic_name is a TPTP-defined or user-defined designator for a logical
language and options are comma-separated key-value pairs that fix the
specific logic based on that language.
An in-depth overview of the new format is presented in (Steen et al., 2022; Steen & Sutcliffe, 2024).
4.2 A Format for I/O logic reasoning.
The problem input format of rio is TPTP NXF as introduced above. Currently, only the propositional fragment of NXF is supported by rio as the underlying formalism for I/O logic reasoning.
An I/O logic problem file starts with a semantics specification, i.e., a NXF formula of role logic, as follows:
In this specification, the are placeholders for the possible arguments:
-
•
$$out1, $$out2, $$out3, $$out4 ,
-
•
$$credulous, $$skeptical ,
-
•
is a comma-separated sequence of formulas, and
-
•
is a comma-separated sequence of tuples that contain names of annotated formulas.
The entries $$throughput, $$constrained $$constraints, and $$preference are optional. $$throughput defaults to $false (when given no value) so that the output operators are used without throughput when this parameter is omitted. Giving no value for $$constrained means that unconstrained I/O logic reasoning is used. When using constrained output, the $$preference parameter specifies the preference relation between the given norms. Here, all norms within a single tuple are equally preferred (wrt. ), and preferred over every norm in any of the following tuples, etc. As an example, an entry of the form [[name1,name2],[name3],[name4]] specifies a preference relation in which the norm with name name1 is equally preferred as norm name2, and both are preferred over name3 and name4, where in turn name3 is preferred over name4. Giving a value for $$constraints has no effect if $$constrained is not set. Equivalently, giving a value for $$preference has no effect if $$constrained is not set. For convenience, the pseudo formula $$input can be used as value for $$constraints for directly referring to the input .
The remaining problem file is structured as follows: Norms are non-classical formulas of role axiom of form …
and inputs are classical TFF formulas of role hypothesis. Additionally, a problem may contain an arbitrary number of conjectures that express conjectured outputs.
5 Implementation
The prototypical automated reasoning system rio (for reasoner for input/output logic) implements decision procedures based on the SAT reductions presented above. It is written in Scala and uses PicoSAT (Biere, 2008) as a SAT solver backend and MUST (Bendík & Černá, 2020) for MUS enumeration. rio is open-source and available under BSD license at GitHub121212https://github.com/aureleeNet/rio. and via Zenodo (Steen, 2026).
5.1 Application Examples
Two example I/O logic problems are given in Figures 4 and 5. In the first example, cf. Fig. 4, three norms are encoded: , , that represent the expressions if I park my car, I ought to get a parking ticket or get a fine, if I get a parking ticket, I ought to pay it, and if I get a fine, I ought to pay it, respectively. The problem furthermore specifies the input .
The second example, cf. Fig. 5, encodes Chisholm paradox as introduced in Example 2.2. In the problem statement, two outputs are conjectured: and .
rio returns results according to the SZS standard (Sutcliffe, 2017). There are two main use cases: If no conjecture is given, rio will return SZS status Success, generate a finite base of all outputs and return it as SZS output ListOfFormulae. If the problem contains at least one conjecture, rio will return one SZS status per conjecture as follows: SZS status Theorem for conjectured outputs that are indeed in the output set, and SZS status CounterSatisfiable for conjectured outputs that are, in fact, not contained in the output set.
The output given by rio for each of the two examples from Figures 4 and 5 is displayed at Figures 6 and 7: In Fig. 6, the elements of the finite basis of the output are given line-by-line, representing . In Fig. 7, each of the conjectures is assessed by a dedicated SZS status line, indicating that and .
6 rio: Case Study
The implemented reasoning methods are now applied to a motivating case study originating from a ruling of the German federal constitutional court (Bundesverfassungsgericht, BVerfG) limiting the jurisdictional competence of the Court of Justice of the European Union (ECJ) in the context of a bond buying programme of the European Central Bank (ECB).131313Decision of May 5, 2020, 2 BvR 859/15. See http://www.bverfg.de/e/rs20200505_2bvr085915en.html. The ruling illustrates a major difference in the understanding and application of European norms, in particular the German BVerfG accuses the ECJ of having omitted a key step within its legal process. However, following the standard reading of legal terminology, the fundamental laws governing the work of the ECJ prohibit the ECJ from undertake exactly this step. Even more, the German BVerfG has made it clear in prior rulings that it acknowledges the fundamental principles that underlie this prohibition. The application of rio for studying this conflict (to some extent) is presented in the following case study. It is translated and suitably adapted from earlier work (Adrian et al., 2023).
A brief summary of the decision’s context is as follows: Following a constitutional appeal about the legitimacy of the bond buying programme of the European Central Bank the BVerfG, within the scope of a so-called preliminary ruling procedure (Vorabentscheidungsverfahren), calls upon the ECJ to provide an interpretation of the relevant treaty law. The ECJ decides that the bond buying programme of the ECB does not conflict with treaty law. Then, remarkably, the German BVerfG does not follow the ECJ as it contains, according to the BVerfG, significant methodical errors so that it cannot (and indeed must not) follow its decision.
In general, the German BVerfG follows German legal methods, whereas it is accepted that the ECJ works with individual (European) legal methods. While the systems are indeed different, they necessarily have overlapping concepts such as the differentiation between interpretation of law (an abstract notion) and application of law (a concrete case-oriented notion). Roughly, law interpretation speaks about how to generally understand the scope of legal norms and their intended meaning. This is independent from concrete cases, hence considered an abstract-general notion. On the other hand, law applications speaks about, among others, how to select the correct norms for a concrete case, how to weigh legal goods, and how to produce legal consequences (hence considered a concrete-individual notion). Within the scope of preliminary ruling procedures, the ECJ is allowed to do the former but not the latter.
A model of the case facts and relevant norms is now constructed in I/O logic such that the decision can be inspected from different perspectives using rio. In particular, the case study highlights the flexibility of the I/O logic framework for reasoning in unconstrained, constrained, and preference-based scenarios; and also its uniform representation in the proposed TPTP-based syntax format. The use of I/O logic for normative reasoning in multi-agent systems is advocated, e.g., by Boella and van der Torre (2004). For the sake of simplicity, the model here only shows a minimal viable setup as relevant for the case study.
6.1 Case facts
The propositional atoms used as vocabulary for representing the case facts and the relevant norms are displayed and described in Table 1. Using these atoms, the case facts are represented as input as follows:
A fundamental requirement of the European legal system is that models of law application (subsumption) and models of law interpretation must differentiate between these two legal concepts.141414See, e.g., article 267 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) which dictates that the ECJ may only interpret but not apply law in the context of a preliminary ruling procedure. Input (A1) maintains this difference by stating that abstract-general assessments must be strictly separated from concrete-individual assessments.
Law interpretation and law application is then defined as an instance of an abstract-general assessment and a concrete-individual assessment, respectively, by (A2) and (A3).
A so-called assessment of adequacy is a concrete-individual assessment because it involves law application, yielding input (A4).
In the case decision, the BVerfG states: ”This view […] is no longer tenable from a methodological perspective […]. [T]he ECJ Judgment itself constitutes an ultra vires act and thus has no binding effect [in Germany].”151515See Rd. 119 in 2 BvR 859/15, https://www.bverfg.de/e/rs20170718_2bvr085915. An ultra vires act is an act that was executed outside of the scope of one’s own competencies (i.e., not having a legal basis). The conditional that if the ECJ decision is not sound from a methodological perspective, it constitutes an ultra vires act is encoded by (A5).
The relevant ruling of the ECJ that is not followed by the BVerfG is enacted in the scope of a preliminary ruling procedure, this is formalized by (A6).
For that ruling, an assessment of proportionality was conducted by the ECJ, but an assessment of adequacy was omitted, represented by (A7).
6.2 Considered Norms
The relevant norms for the case study are extracted from the relevant legal norms, from implicit knowledge from legal methodology, and from case decisions. The norm set is constructed as follows:
If the ECJ’s decision is ultra vires, the national court must not follow it (N1); but in general it has to follow the ruling of the ECJ (N2).
The ECJ may only interpret law in the scope of a preliminary ruling procedure; but it may not apply law.161616According to article 267 TFEU. This is encoded by norms (N3) and (N4), respectively.
It is a usual legal requirement to respect the principle of proportionality171717See also Rd. 123 in 2 BvR 859/15., so an assessment of proportionality is required as part of a preliminary ruling procedure (N5).
According to the BVerfG, the ECJ’s omission of an assessment of adequacy is a methodological error.181818See Rd. 119 in 2 BvR 859/15: ”This view […] is no longer tenable from a methodological perspective given that it completely disregards the actual effects of the PSPP”. As a consequence, an assessment of adequacy by the ECJ within the scope of a preliminary ruling procedure is, in general, methodologically sound (N6).
In particular, its omission in the concrete case constitutes a methodological error (N7).
In contrast, the ECJ deems its ruling (without an assessment of adequacy) to be methodically sound (N8).
In other cases the ECJ does, however, conduct assessments of adequacy within the scope of preliminary ruling procedures. So this procedure is also methodically sound from the ECJ’s perspective (N9).
6.3 Assessment using rio
It is easy to see that the set from above contains conflicting norms, some of which apply in the situation described by . Indeed rio verifies that , i.e. that I/O logic without constraints will not give meaningful answers:
% SZS status Success % SZS output start ListOfFormulae $false % SZS output end ListOfFormulae The input problem for this assessment is displayed in Appendix A.
In a constrained setting (without preferences between the individual norms) it holds that
for .191919In this case study only the case of , i.e., output consistent with the situation (), is assessed. Also, the underlying output operator is for all queries. The outputs primarily rely on reusable output, so using does not change the results; when using or however, some outputs are lost.
Intuitively, the first set of norms in this maxfamily describes a possible point of view from the perspective of the ECJ; the second and third those of the BVerfG. In the latter case, there exists a natural conflict between norm (N1) and norm (N2), resulting in two different sets for the BVerfG. The skeptical output is then given by
as witnessed by rio’s output (produced by the input problem displayed in Appendix B):
% SZS status Success % SZS output start ListOfFormulae assessmentOfProportionalityECJ interpretationECJ ~applicationECJ ~methodicallySoundECJ | bVerfGFollowsECJ % SZS output end ListOfFormulae An interesting observation is that, according to the constrained output, there is no obligation of the BVerfG to follow or not to follow the ECJ’s decision. It is only stated that the BVerfG must follow the ECJ if its decision is methodically sound.
This result is quite interesting as no clear solution of the decision problem (or a verification of the BVerfG’s decision) can be inferred. From a logical perspective, of course, this is quite trivial to see: Every norm is treated equally wrt. speciality and/or preference, so usual legal principles such as lex specialis derogat legi generali (more specialized norms defeat general norms) are not respected.
Because of the incompatible view points, the credulous output is inconsistent, , as verified by rio (not shown here).
In order to accommodate a more fine-grained analysis of the case, and to assess the situation from different view points, the formalization is now augmented with a preference ordering between the norms in order to allow for preferred output (Parent, 2011), as briefly introduced further above.
Following lex specialis derogat legi generali it seems meaningful to assume that . Further assuming that the norms originating from the different viewpoints are equally preferred, i.e., where denotes an equal preference between the involved norms, the preferred output becomes (as witnessed by rio, not shown here, but see Appendix C for the problem file):
This output strengthens the skeptical output (without preferences) in the sense that the BVerfG must follow the ECJ if and only if the decision of the ECJ is methodically sound (as opposed to a simple implication). This is because the two conflicting sets in the maxfamily that are ascribed to the BVerfG’s point of view are now reduced to one set due to the preference relation. Still, it is not possible to conclude any argument for or against one of the two different positions.
In contrast, if it is assumed that and , while , , , and , the position of the BVerfG is preferred to that of the ECJ. Consequently, this gives …
In this case, an obligation is detached that the BVerfG must not follow the ECJ’s decision, and also that the work on the ECJ must be considered methodically unsound (see Appendix D for the problem file).
On the other hand, if the position of the ECJ is preferred (, , , and ), a different result is produced:
Here, according to the position of the ECJ, the BVerfG has to follow its ruling, and its work has to be considered methodically sound (see Appendix E for the problem file).
The preference relation is provided externally (e.g., by the user of rio or by argumentation systems) so that a conclusive answer of the question (whether the BVerfG should have followed the ECJ’s decision or not) remains unanswered. Still, it is shown that rio can be used to assess different normative setups to allow for a computer-assisted analysis of non-trivial cases.
Note that outputs such as and , as generated above, are not heads of any norm involved in the inference process. This further motivates the usage of the output problem as opposed to the entailment problem for output discovery, in particular when the set of norms grows or the structure of outputs are non-trivial (e.g., because of preference-based output).
7 Conclusion
In this paper a reduction of unconstrained and constrained I/O logic reasoning to a sequence of SAT problems is presented. As opposed to earlier work of the author that focused on the entailment problem in I/O logics, this work addresses the output problem that asks for a finite set of formulas, called a basis, from which every generated output is entailed. The reduction is sound and complete with respect to I/O logic semantics.
For a given normative system and input , the basis of the output set needs to be computed only once. Subsequently, conjectured outputs can be checked for entailment from the basis using classical entailment procedures (e.g., SAT solvers). Advantages of this approach are the following:
-
•
It provides a uniform automation approach for unconstrained and constrained I/O logics (with and without throughout), as well as further extensions resp. generalizations (see below).
-
•
It makes explicit the structure of the set of entailed formulas. This information can, e.g., be used to construct an explanation of why some specific formula is entailed.
-
•
Next to transparency reasons, the output problem allows for a principled assessment of obligations in force. In particular, in complex scenarios it may not be clear which concrete obligation to check for entailment.
A notable disadvantage is that, if interested in the entailment problem only, the proposed method comes with a higher time and space complexity than direct methods, and so will provide less efficient means of automation.
Furthermore, using an generalized net output operator the presented reasoning framework is general enough to support extensions of constrained I/O logic reasoning, in particular preference-based I/O logic reasoning. Also, other forms of norm set selection and output aggregation can easily be built on top of the existing methods.
The reasoning procedures have been implemented as a new normative reasoning software called rio that connects to the TPTP standard for automated theorem proving systems. For this purpose, a representation format for I/O logic reasoning based on the TPTP NXF language standard is presented. The implementation is applied to a motivating case study, illustrating the automation provided by rio. The procedures and their implementation in rio constitute a building block towards (semi-)automated normative reasoning systems, e.g., for compliance checking and legal assessment.
Further Work.
An extensive practical evaluation of the approach and implementation is further work. This is because there do not exist other automation systems for I/O logics, and only few small benchmarks. The build-up of a representative collection of benchmark problems for I/O logic reasoning is a medium- and long-term goal.
Proof reconstruction for unconstrained I/O logic reasoning can be achieved by storing the set of (weakly) triggered set of norms, and the associated set of inputs, for each individual output as meta information during the procedure. This is mainly engineering work, but will enable independent (external) proof verification of results produced by rio based on the sound and complete derivation rules of Makinson and van der Torre (2000).
I/O logics have been employed in the context of studying conditional permissions (Makinson & van der Torre, 2003) and it seems fruitful to integrate both obligations and permissions within one automated reasoning framework. Recent work addresses weaker notions of I/O logic that allow for a fined-grained control over employed inference principles (Parent & van der Torre, 2018). An integration of these techniques remains further work.
The SAT-based approach seems fit to allow automated reasoning using so-called I/O logics without weakening (Parent & van der Torre, 2014), a generalization of the output operators discussed here. However, an implementation is not available yet.
I/O logics based on first-order languages have been studied in the context of legal knowledge bases for privacy analysis with respect to the GDPR (Robaldo et al., 2020). Automating such a quantified language in the I/O framework for employment in practical normative reasoning is the main motivation of this work. As a consequence, the next step is to generalize the SAT-based encoding towards first-order reasoning using Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) solvers (Barrett et al., 2021) instead of SAT solvers. In fact, the MUS enumeration tool used by rio already supports MUS extraction from SMT solvers.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and improvements.
Disclosure statement
The author report there are no competing interests to declare.
Data availability statement
The rio software version 1.3 is available at Zenodo via https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18757637.
References
- \NAT@swatrue
- Adrian et al. (2023) Adrian, A., Steen, A., and Rapp, M. (2023). Juristische Methodenlehre 3.0: Auf dem Weg zu einer Maschinengestützten Methodenwissenschaft. Jusletter IT, 23. Februar 2023. \NAT@swatrue
- Athan et al. (2015) Athan, T., Governatori, G., Palmirani, M., Paschke, A., and Wyner, A. Z. (2015). LegalRuleML: Design principles and foundations. In W. Faber and A. Paschke (Eds.), Reasoning web. web logic rules - 11th international summer school 2015, berlin, germany, july 31 - august 4, 2015, tutorial lectures (Vol. 9203, pp. 151–188). Springer.
- Bacchus & Katsirelos (2016) Bacchus, F., & Katsirelos, G. (2016). Finding a collection of muses incrementally. In C. Quimper (Ed.), Integration of AI and OR techniques in constraint programming - 13th international conference, CPAIOR 2016, banff, ab, canada, may 29 - june 1, 2016, proceedings (Vol. 9676, pp. 35–44). Springer.
- Barnat et al. (2016) Barnat, J., Bauch, P., Benes, N., Brim, L., Beran, J., & Kratochvila, T. (2016). Analysing sanity of requirements for avionics systems. Formal Aspects Comput., 28(1), 45–63.
- Barrett et al. (2021) Barrett, C. W., Sebastiani, R., Seshia, S. A., & Tinelli, C. (2021). Satisfiability modulo theories. In Handbook of satisfiability (Vol. 336, pp. 1267–1329). IOS Press.
- Belov & Marques-Silva (2012) Belov, A., & Marques-Silva, J. (2012). Muser2: An efficient MUS extractor. J. Satisf. Boolean Model. Comput., 8(3/4), 123–128.
- Bendík (2017) Bendík, J. (2017). Consistency checking in requirements analysis. In ISSTA (pp. 408–411). ACM.
- Bendík & Černá (2020) Bendík, J., & Černá, I. (2020). MUST: minimal unsatisfiable subsets enumeration tool. In International conference on tools and algorithms for the construction and analysis of systems (pp. 135–152).
- Bendík et al. (2018) Bendík, J., Cerná, I., & Benes, N. (2018). Recursive online enumeration of all minimal unsatisfiable subsets. In S. K. Lahiri & C. Wang (Eds.), Automated technology for verification and analysis - 16th international symposium, ATVA 2018, los angeles, ca, usa, october 7-10, 2018, proceedings (Vol. 11138, pp. 143–159). Springer.
- Benzmüller et al. (2019) Benzmüller, C., Farjami, A., Meder, P., & Parent, X. (2019). I/O logic in HOL. Journal of Applied Logics – IfCoLoG Journal of Logics and their Applications (Special Issue: Reasoning for Legal AI), 6(5), 715–732.
- Biere (2008) Biere, A. (2008). Picosat essentials. J. Satisf. Boolean Model. Comput., 4(2-4), 75–97.
- Biere et al. (2021) Biere, A., Heule, M., van Maaren, H., & Walsh, T. (Eds.). (2021). Handbook of satisfiability - second edition (Vol. 336). IOS Press.
- Boella & van der Torre (2004) Boella, G., & van der Torre, L. W. N. (2004). Regulative and constitutive norms in normative multiagent systems. In D. Dubois, C. A. Welty, & M. Williams (Eds.), Principles of knowledge representation and reasoning: Proceedings of the ninth international conference (kr2004), whistler, canada, june 2-5, 2004 (pp. 255–266). AAAI Press.
- Chisholm (1963) Chisholm, R. M. (1963). Contrary-to-duty imperatives and deontic logic. Analysis, 24(2), 33–36.
- Ciabattoni & Rozplokhas (2023) Ciabattoni, A., & Rozplokhas, D. (2023). Streamlining input/output logics with sequent calculi. In P. Marquis, T. C. Son, & G. Kern-Isberner (Eds.), Proceedings of the 20th international conference on principles of knowledge representation and reasoning, KR 2023, rhodes, greece, september 2-8, 2023 (pp. 146–155).
- Fermé & Hansson (2018) Fermé, E. L., & Hansson, S. O. (2018). Belief change - introduction and overview. Springer.
- Gabbay et al. (2013) Gabbay, D., Horty, J., Parent, X., van der Meyden, R., & van der Torre, L. (2013). Handbook of deontic logic and normative systems. College Publications.
- Ghassabani et al. (2017) Ghassabani, E., Whalen, M. W., & Gacek, A. (2017). Efficient generation of all minimal inductive validity cores. In D. Stewart & G. Weissenbacher (Eds.), 2017 formal methods in computer aided design, FMCAD 2017, vienna, austria, october 2-6, 2017 (pp. 31–38). IEEE.
- Han & Lee (1999) Han, B., & Lee, S. (1999). Deriving minimal conflict sets by cs-trees with mark set in diagnosis from first principles. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part B, 29(2), 281–286.
- Hansen (2014) Hansen, J. (2014). Reasoning about permission and obligation. In David makinson on classical methods for non-classical problems (Vol. 3, pp. 287–333). Springer.
- Hansson (1969) Hansson, B. (1969). An analysis of some deontic logics. Nous, 373–398.
- Lellmann (2021) Lellmann, B. (2021). From input/output logics to conditional logics via sequents - with provers. In A. Das & S. Negri (Eds.), Automated reasoning with analytic tableaux and related methods - 30th international conference, TABLEAUX 2021, birmingham, uk, september 6-9, 2021, proceedings (Vol. 12842, pp. 147–164). Springer.
- Liffiton & Sakallah (2009) Liffiton, M. H., & Sakallah, K. A. (2009). Generalizing core-guided max-sat. In O. Kullmann (Ed.), Theory and applications of satisfiability testing - SAT 2009, 12th international conference, SAT 2009, swansea, uk, june 30 - july 3, 2009. proceedings (Vol. 5584, pp. 481–494). Springer.
- Makinson & van der Torre (2000) Makinson, D., & van der Torre, L. W. N. (2000). Input/Output Logics. J. Philosophical Logic, 29(4), 383–408.
- Makinson & van der Torre (2001) Makinson, D., & van der Torre, L. W. N. (2001). Constraints for Input/Output Logics. J. Philosophical Logic, 30(2), 155–185.
- Makinson & van der Torre (2003) Makinson, D., & van der Torre, L. W. N. (2003). Permission from an input/output perspective. J. Philosophical Logic, 32(4), 391–416.
- Morgado et al. (2012) Morgado, A., Liffiton, M. H., & Marques-Silva, J. (2012). Maxsat-based MCS enumeration. In A. Biere, A. Nahir, & T. E. J. Vos (Eds.), Hardware and software: Verification and testing - 8th international haifa verification conference, HVC 2012, haifa, israel, november 6-8, 2012. revised selected papers (Vol. 7857, pp. 86–101). Springer.
- Narodytska et al. (2018) Narodytska, N., Bjørner, N. S., Marinescu, M. V., & Sagiv, M. (2018). Core-guided minimal correction set and core enumeration. In J. Lang (Ed.), Proceedings of the twenty-seventh international joint conference on artificial intelligence, IJCAI 2018, july 13-19, 2018, stockholm, sweden (pp. 1353–1361). ijcai.org.
- Parent (2011) Parent, X. (2011). Moral particularism in the light of deontic logic. Artif. Intell. Law, 19(2-3), 75–98.
- Parent & van der Torre (2003) Parent, X., & van der Torre, L. (2003). Input/output logic. In Handbook of deontic logic and normative systems (pp. 499–544). College Publications.
- Parent & van der Torre (2018) Parent, X., & van der Torre, L. (2018). I/O logics with a consistency check. In J. M. Broersen, C. Condoravdi, N. Shyam, & G. Pigozzi (Eds.), International conference on deontic logic and normative systems (deon 2018) (pp. 285–299). College Publications.
- Parent & van der Torre (2014) Parent, X., & van der Torre, L. W. N. (2014). ”Sing and Dance!” - Input/Output Logics without Weakening. In DEON (Vol. 8554, pp. 149–165). Springer.
- Poole (1988) Poole, D. (1988). A logical framework for default reasoning. Artif. Intell., 36(1), 27–47.
- Reiter (1980) Reiter, R. (1980). A logic for default reasoning. Artif. Intell., 13(1-2), 81–132.
- Robaldo (2021) Robaldo, L. (2021). Towards compliance checking in reified I/O logic via SHACL. In ICAIL (pp. 215–219). ACM.
- Robaldo et al. (2020) Robaldo, L., Bartolini, C., Palmirani, M., Rossi, A., Martoni, M., & Lenzini, G. (2020). Formalizing GDPR provisions in reified I/O logic: The DAPRECO knowledge base. J. Log. Lang. Inf., 29(4), 401–449.
- Robaldo & Sun (2017) Robaldo, L., & Sun, X. (2017). Reified input/output logic: Combining input/output logic and reification to represent norms coming from existing legislation. J. Log. Comput., 27(8), 2471–2503.
- W3C (2017) Shapes constraint language (SHACL) (Tech. Rep.). (2017). W3C. Retrieved from https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl
- Steen (2021) Steen, A. (2021). Goal-Directed Decision Procedures for Input/Output Logics. In F. Liu, A. Marra, P. Portner, & F. V. D. Putte (Eds.), Deontic logic and normative systems, 15th international conference, deon 2020/2021 (pp. 414–426). College Publications.
- Steen (2026) Steen, A. (2026). rio: Reasoner for input/output logic, v1.3 (software artifact). Zenodo. Zenodo.
- Steen & Fuenmayor (2022) Steen, A., & Fuenmayor, D. (2022). Bridging between legalruleml and TPTP for automated normative reasoning. In G. Governatori & A. Turhan (Eds.), Rules and reasoning - 6th international joint conference on rules and reasoning, ruleml+rr 2022, berlin, germany, september 26-28, 2022, proceedings (Vol. 13752, pp. 244–260). Springer.
- Steen et al. (2022) Steen, A., Fuenmayor, D., Gleißner, T., Sutcliffe, G., & Benzmüller, C. (2022). Automated reasoning in non-classical logics in the TPTP world. In B. Konev, C. Schon, & A. Steen (Eds.), Proceedings of the workshop on practical aspects of automated reasoning co-located with the 11th international joint conference on automated reasoning (floc/ijcar 2022), haifa, israel, august, 11 - 12, 2022 (Vol. 3201). CEUR-WS.org.
- Steen & Sutcliffe (2024) Steen, A., & Sutcliffe, G. (2024). TPTP world infrastructure for non-classical logics. In C. W. Brown, D. Kaufmann, C. Nalon, A. Steen, & M. Suda (Eds.), Joint proceedings of the 9th workshop on practical aspects of automated reasoning (PAAR) and the 9th satisfiability checking and symbolic computation workshop (sc-square), 2024 co-located with the 12th international joint conference on automated reasoning (IJCAR 2024), nancy, france, july 2, 2024 (Vol. 3717, pp. 74–90). CEUR-WS.org.
- Stolpe (2008) Stolpe, A. (2008). Norms and norm-system dynamics (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Department of Philosophy, University of Bergen, Norway.
- Stuckey et al. (2003) Stuckey, P. J., Sulzmann, M., & Wazny, J. (2003). Interactive type debugging in haskell. In J. Jeuring (Ed.), Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN workshop on haskell, haskell 2003, uppsala, sweden, august 28, 2003 (pp. 72–83). ACM.
- Sun & Robaldo (2017) Sun, X., & Robaldo, L. (2017). On the complexity of input/output logic. J. Appl. Log., 25, 69–88.
- Sutcliffe (2017) Sutcliffe, G. (2017). The TPTP problem library and associated infrastructure - from CNF to th0, TPTP v6.4.0. J. Autom. Reason., 59(4), 483–502.
- Sutcliffe et al. (2012) Sutcliffe, G., Schulz, S., Claessen, K., & Baumgartner, P. (2012). The TPTP typed first-order form with arithmetic. In N. S. Bjørner & A. Voronkov (Eds.), Logic for programming, artificial intelligence, and reasoning - 18th international conference, lpar-18, mérida, venezuela, march 11-15, 2012. proceedings (Vol. 7180, pp. 406–419). Springer.
- von Wright (1951) von Wright, G. H. (1951). Deontic logic. Mind, 60, 1–15.
- W3C (2012) Web Ontology Language (OWL) (Tech. Rep.). (2012). W3C. Retrieved from https://www.w3.org/OWL/
Appendix A Input Problem Unconstrained Output
% I/O logic semantics specification tff(semantics, logic, $$iol == [ $$operator == $$out3 ] ). % Declaration of norms tff(n1, axiom, {$$norm} @ (ultraViresECJ, ~bVerfGFollowsECJ) ). tff(n2, axiom, {$$norm} @ ($true, bVerfGFollowsECJ) ). tff(n3, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, interpretationECJ) ). tff(n4, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, ~applicationECJ) ). tff(n5, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, assessmentOfProportionalityECJ) ). tff(n9, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & assessmentOfAdequacyECJ, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n8, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ & ecbBondBuyingDecision, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n6, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & assessmentOfAdequacyECJ, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n7, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ & ecbBondBuyingDecision, ~methodicallySoundECJ) ). % Declaration of inputs tff(a61, hypothesis, prelimRulingProcECJ). tff(a71, hypothesis, assessmentOfProportionalityECJ). tff(a72, hypothesis, ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ). tff(a62, hypothesis, ecbBondBuyingDecision). tff(a2, hypothesis, interpretationECJ => abstractAssessmentECJ). tff(a3, hypothesis, applicationECJ => concreteAssessmentECJ). tff(a1, hypothesis, ~(abstractAssessmentECJ <=> concreteAssessmentECJ)). tff(a4, hypothesis, assessmentOfAdequacyECJ => ~abstractAssessmentECJ). tff(a5, hypothesis, ~methodicallySoundECJ => ultraViresECJ).
Appendix B Input Problem Constrained Output
% I/O logic semantics specification tff(semantics, logic, $$iol == [ $$operator == $$out3, $$constrained == $$skeptical, $$constraints == $$input ] ). % Declaration of norms tff(n1, axiom, {$$norm} @ (ultraViresECJ, ~bVerfGFollowsECJ) ). tff(n2, axiom, {$$norm} @ ($true, bVerfGFollowsECJ) ). tff(n3, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, interpretationECJ) ). tff(n4, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, ~applicationECJ) ). tff(n5, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, assessmentOfProportionalityECJ) ). tff(n9, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & assessmentOfAdequacyECJ, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n8, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ & ecbBondBuyingDecision, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n6, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & assessmentOfAdequacyECJ, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n7, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ & ecbBondBuyingDecision, ~methodicallySoundECJ) ). % Declaration of inputs tff(a61, hypothesis, prelimRulingProcECJ). tff(a71, hypothesis, assessmentOfProportionalityECJ). tff(a72, hypothesis, ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ). tff(a62, hypothesis, ecbBondBuyingDecision). tff(a2, hypothesis, interpretationECJ => abstractAssessmentECJ). tff(a3, hypothesis, applicationECJ => concreteAssessmentECJ). tff(a1, hypothesis, ~(abstractAssessmentECJ <=> concreteAssessmentECJ)). tff(a4, hypothesis, assessmentOfAdequacyECJ => ~abstractAssessmentECJ). tff(a5, hypothesis, ~methodicallySoundECJ => ultraViresECJ).
Appendix C Input Problem Preferred Output #1
% I/O logic semantics specification tff(semantics, logic, $$iol == [ $$operator == $$out3, $$constrained == $$skeptical, $$preference == [[n6, n7, n8, n9], n1, n2], $$constraints == $$input ] ). % Declaration of norms tff(n1, axiom, {$$norm} @ (ultraViresECJ, ~bVerfGFollowsECJ) ). tff(n2, axiom, {$$norm} @ ($true, bVerfGFollowsECJ) ). tff(n3, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, interpretationECJ) ). tff(n4, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, ~applicationECJ) ). tff(n5, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, assessmentOfProportionalityECJ) ). tff(n9, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & assessmentOfAdequacyECJ, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n8, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ & ecbBondBuyingDecision, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n6, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & assessmentOfAdequacyECJ, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n7, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ & ecbBondBuyingDecision, ~methodicallySoundECJ) ). % Declaration of inputs tff(a61, hypothesis, prelimRulingProcECJ). tff(a71, hypothesis, assessmentOfProportionalityECJ). tff(a72, hypothesis, ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ). tff(a62, hypothesis, ecbBondBuyingDecision). tff(a2, hypothesis, interpretationECJ => abstractAssessmentECJ). tff(a3, hypothesis, applicationECJ => concreteAssessmentECJ). tff(a1, hypothesis, ~(abstractAssessmentECJ <=> concreteAssessmentECJ)). tff(a4, hypothesis, assessmentOfAdequacyECJ => ~abstractAssessmentECJ). tff(a5, hypothesis, ~methodicallySoundECJ => ultraViresECJ).
Appendix D Input Problem Preferred Output #2
% I/O logic semantics specification tff(semantics, logic, $$iol == [ $$operator == $$out3, $$constrained == $$skeptical, $$preference == [[n6, n7], [n8, n9], n1, n2], $$constraints == $$input ] ). % Declaration of norms tff(n1, axiom, {$$norm} @ (ultraViresECJ, ~bVerfGFollowsECJ) ). tff(n2, axiom, {$$norm} @ ($true, bVerfGFollowsECJ) ). tff(n3, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, interpretationECJ) ). tff(n4, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, ~applicationECJ) ). tff(n5, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, assessmentOfProportionalityECJ) ). tff(n9, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & assessmentOfAdequacyECJ, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n8, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ & ecbBondBuyingDecision, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n6, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & assessmentOfAdequacyECJ, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n7, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ & ecbBondBuyingDecision, ~methodicallySoundECJ) ). % Declaration of inputs tff(a61, hypothesis, prelimRulingProcECJ). tff(a71, hypothesis, assessmentOfProportionalityECJ). tff(a72, hypothesis, ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ). tff(a62, hypothesis, ecbBondBuyingDecision). tff(a2, hypothesis, interpretationECJ => abstractAssessmentECJ). tff(a3, hypothesis, applicationECJ => concreteAssessmentECJ). tff(a1, hypothesis, ~(abstractAssessmentECJ <=> concreteAssessmentECJ)). tff(a4, hypothesis, assessmentOfAdequacyECJ => ~abstractAssessmentECJ). tff(a5, hypothesis, ~methodicallySoundECJ => ultraViresECJ).
Appendix E Input Problem Preferred Output #3
% I/O logic semantics specification tff(semantics, logic, $$iol == [ $$operator == $$out3, $$constrained == $$skeptical, $$preference == [[n8, n9], [n6, n7], n1, n2], $$constraints == $$input ] ). % Declaration of norms tff(n1, axiom, {$$norm} @ (ultraViresECJ, ~bVerfGFollowsECJ) ). tff(n2, axiom, {$$norm} @ ($true, bVerfGFollowsECJ) ). tff(n3, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, interpretationECJ) ). tff(n4, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, ~applicationECJ) ). tff(n5, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ, assessmentOfProportionalityECJ) ). tff(n9, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & assessmentOfAdequacyECJ, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n8, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ & ecbBondBuyingDecision, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n6, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & assessmentOfAdequacyECJ, methodicallySoundECJ) ). tff(n7, axiom, {$$norm} @ (prelimRulingProcECJ & ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ & ecbBondBuyingDecision, ~methodicallySoundECJ) ). % Declaration of inputs tff(a61, hypothesis, prelimRulingProcECJ). tff(a71, hypothesis, assessmentOfProportionalityECJ). tff(a72, hypothesis, ~assessmentOfAdequacyECJ). tff(a62, hypothesis, ecbBondBuyingDecision). tff(a2, hypothesis, interpretationECJ => abstractAssessmentECJ). tff(a3, hypothesis, applicationECJ => concreteAssessmentECJ). tff(a1, hypothesis, ~(abstractAssessmentECJ <=> concreteAssessmentECJ)). tff(a4, hypothesis, assessmentOfAdequacyECJ => ~abstractAssessmentECJ). tff(a5, hypothesis, ~methodicallySoundECJ => ultraViresECJ).

KAYNAK : https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.16242