Revisiting the (Sub)Optimality of Best-of-N for Inference-Time Alignment
Abstract
Best-of- (BoN) sampling is a widely used inference-time alignment method for language models, whereby candidate responses are sampled from a reference model and the one with the highest predicted reward according to a learned reward model is selected. Despite its widespread practical use, recent theoretical work has suggested that it is statistically suboptimal and vulnerable to reward hacking, the process by which models exploit weaknesses in the learned reward model to achieve high estimated reward without genuinely improving performance. We revisit this question under assumptions that more closely reflect practice than that of prior work. In particular, in contradistinction to earlier analyses that focused on expected true reward, which may not be meaningful in many practical settings, we investigate how inference-time alignment affects the win-rate, a pairwise comparison-based metric more closely aligned with how reward models are trained and evaluated in practice. We demonstrate that, under minimal conditions on the quality of the reference model and learned reward model, properly tuned BoN is both computationally and statistically optimal in achieving high win-rate, partially explaining its widespread practical success. Because BoN remains susceptible to reward-hacking in this setting, we propose a simple and practical variant that provably eliminates reward-hacking while maintaining optimal statistical performance. Finally, we show that prior approaches are provably suboptimal when considering win-rate, highlighting the importance of choosing appropriate objectives when analyzing inference-time alignment methods.
1 Introduction
Inference-time compute has emerged as a critical new scaling axis in Language Models (LMs) over the past few years, resulting in major advances in mathematical reasoning, coding ability, and reliability [brown2024large, guo2025deepseek, jaech2024openai]. Previous works have identified two primary approaches to scaling inference-time compute: (i) parallel scaling, where a model samples multiple outputs in parallel and selects the one to return to a user; and (ii) serial scaling, where a model generates a much longer output that allows it access to computationally more involved solutions [mirtaheri2025let]. While both approaches have demonstrated significant empirical success, parallel scaling is particularly appealing due to its simplicity, ease of implementation, and ability to leverage existing models without additional training, with a number of empirical results demonstrating strong performance improvements from parallel scaling alone [brown2024large, gui2024bonbon, huang2025self]. Additionally, the current approach to training models using Reinforcement Learning to take advantage of serial scaling relies critically on parallel scaling in order to estimate reward signals during the training process [guo2025deepseek]. Thus, understanding the theoretical underpinnings of parallel scaling is a critical step towards understanding the capabilities of modern LMs.
The critical question that arises in the parallel scaling regime is how best to select the final returned output from a set of independently sampled candidates. Initial empirical approaches focused on verifiable settings, where the model’s output could be directly scored against a known ground-truth reward depending on a prompt and candidate response ; in this setting, the highest-scoring candidate could be selected [brown2024large]. While such an approach leads to a strong skyline performance, it is not applicable in the vast majority of real-world settings where no such verification is possible. Instead, it has become the standard pracatice to use some learned proxy reward , again depending on the prompt and candidate response, to select the best candidate [stiennon2020learning, stroebl2024inference, nakano2021webgpt, wang2022self, li2022competition]; such an approach leads to the well-known Best-of-N (BoN) algorithm that returns . While the BoN algorithm has demonstrated strong empirical performance across a variety of settings and has seen some prior theoretical work [huang2025self, huang2025best], there remain critical lacunae in our understanding of its behavior.
In huang2025best, the authors provide a theoretical analysis of the BoN algorithm in the setting where the learned reward is close to the true reward in terms of mean-squared error under the sampling distribution used to generate candidates and demonstrate reasonable performance compared to some ‘good’ language model as long as is close to in an appropriate sense. Critically, however, they demonstrate that the BoN algorithm is suboptimal in this setting and that in order to achieve optimal performance, one must instead use a more sophisticated (and complicated) -regularized variant of the BoN algorithm introduced therein. This suboptimality arises due to another drawback of BoN: when the number of candidates is large, the algorithm engages in reward-hacking, a manifestation of Goodhart’s law [goodhart1984monetary] whereby the algorithm selects candidates that achieve high reward but are in fact low-quality according to the true reward [gao2023scaling]. The -regularized BoN algorithm is able to mitigate this reward-hacking behavior by penalizing candidates that are unlikely under the sampling distribution , leading to improved performance. While an attractive theoretical result, the empirical relevance of this suboptimality is unclear, as optimally tuned BoN algorithms mostly outperformed the more complicated -regularized variant in practice, either statistically (leading to better performance) or computationally (requiring fewer samples to achieve the same performance).
The gap between theory and practice in huang2025best is partially explained by the fact that the authors in that paper recognize that in the special case where rewards are binary, as is often the case in reasoning tasks where outputs are either correct or incorrect, the BoN algorithm is in fact optimal when the number of candidate responses is properly tuned.111Technically, in that work the authors allow for comparator policies with uniformly bounded likelihood ratios, but such an assumption is unlikely to hold for reasonable in the absence of binary rewards due to the increasingly long generations from modern LMs. On the other hand, in many situations, such as open-ended generation tasks like dialog or creative writing, rewards are not binary but instead take on a wide range of values depending on the quality of the response. In such settings, it remains unclear whether the BoN algorithm is optimal or suboptimal, and if suboptimal, whether more complicated variants can outperform it in practice. Moreover, in any setting, it remains unclear whether the mean-squared error metric used in huang2025best is the most appropriate way to measure the quality of learned reward models and what the appropriate notion of ‘closeness’ between the sampling distribution and the target language model should be. In addition, the performance metric studied in that work is the expected true reward, which is often not very meaningful in many practical situations, where win-rate with respect to some comparator policy (cf. (2)) is a more natural evaluation [alpaca_eval].
In this work, we aim to address these open questions by providing a more complete theoretical understanding of the BoN algorithm that we believe better fits the empirical realities in which it is used, as well as present a new algorithm that is both theoretically optimal and provably mitigates reward-hacking. Our starting point is to observe that neither the mean-squared error metric for reward models nor the metric of expected true reward under the target language model are fully appropriate for understanding the performance of the BoN algorithm. Indeed, in most situations where rewards for language models are nonbinary, the ‘ground truth’ notion of reward is the win-rate, i.e., the proportion of times that some oracular alignment source (either human labellers or a strong LM) prefers the returned response to an offline reference response [alpaca_eval, dubois2023alpacafarm, dubois2024length, ouyang2022training]. Moreover, most reward models are trained in a similar manner, via pairwise comparisons between candidate responses rather than direct regression against some ground-truth reward value, which is rarely available in practice [rafailov2023direct]. Indeed, there is a philosophical question to be asked as to the sense in which a ground-truth reward even exists when there is never direct supervision thereof; most empirical work asserts the Bradley-Terry model [bradley1952rank, ouyang2022training] for practical purposes, but the expected reward remains a somewhat artificial construct.
Furthermore, while natural in the context of learning theory, the use of squared error is somewhat contrived in the context of the BoN algorithm in that it, unlike the algorithm itself, is not scale-invariant: multiplying the reward model by a positive constant does not change the behavior of the BoN algorithm, but it does change the mean-squared error. Instead, a more natural notion of reward mismatch respects the way in which is used in BoN, i.e., monotone transformations should not affect our quality metric. Finally, we address the ad hoc nature of the -regularized BoN algorithm by considering a substantially more general notion of quality, that of -divergence [polyanskiy2010channel], which was extensively studied in block2023sample and intimately connected to the recently introduced notion of coverage [huang2025self, chen2025coverage], which has been fruitfully applied to understand LMs in a variety of settings.222Formally, coverage is defined as . It is easy to see that is bounded above by coverage.
We have two main results in this work, the first of which is as follows.
Theorem 1 (Informal Statement of Theorems˜3 and 4).
If is close to in terms of pairwise win-rate error (cf. (3)), then the BoN algorithm using with tuned achieves optimal performance.
This result demonstrates that when using an appropriate notion of reward model error that is commonly used in practice, the BoN algorithm is in fact optimal, somewhat opposing the practical intuition that arises from huang2025best. Indeed, while not a formal contradiction to the difference in formal settings, our result suggests that the suboptimality identified in huang2025best is an artifact of the assumptions therein rather than a fundamental limitation of the BoN algorithm.
On the other hand, the fundamental insight that reward-hacking can occur when is large remains valid, and thus we further introduce a new -regularized BoN algorithm that directly penalizes candidates that are unlikely under the sampling distribution in terms of the -divergence. Our second main result is as follows:
Theorem 2 (Informal Statement of Theorem˜5).
If is close to in terms of pairwise win-rate error, then the -regularized BoN algorithm (cf. (10)) using with appropriately tuned regularization is both optimal and achieves performance that provably does not decay with .
This result demonstrates that by using -regularization, we can mitigate reward-hacking. A key advantage of our proposed algorithm over prior approaches to combatting reward overoptimization is the simplicity of implementation, which does not require online estimation, extensive additional training, or significant computational overhead beyond that of the BoN algorithm itself [huang2025best, khalaf2025inference, jinnai2025regularized]. Moreover, we show in Proposition˜2 that the -regularized BoN algorithm of huang2025best can be arbitrarily worse than our -regularized BoN algorithm in terms of win-rate regret, demonstrating the insufficiency of prior approaches in this setting.
We now proceed in Section˜2 by introducing and motivating our formal setting as well as clarifying how it differs from that considered in prior work, before stating our results for the BoN algorithm in Section˜3. We then introduce our coverage-regularized BoN algorithm in Section˜4 before discussing some key proof techniques in Section˜5. While in much of the paper we consider a simplified setting where the comparator policy defining win-rate is equal to , we extend our results to apply to settings where the win-rate is defined with respect to an arbitrary comparator in Section˜6. We conclude with a discussion of related work and future directions in Section˜7.
2 Preliminaries and Problem Setup
In this section, we introduce our inference-time alignment framework and formally state the problems we consider. We first describe the computational model through which we interact with language and reward models, before discussing the appropriate notions of model quality.
2.1 Inference-time alignment framework
Our framework is inspired by that of huang2025self, huang2025best, although we consider different desiderata. Throughout, we let denote a space of possible responses and denote a space of possible prompts or contexts. A language model is any map from prompts to distributions over responses; due to the connections with RL, we use the terms language model and policy interchangeably. For the purposes of analysis, we will suppose that there exists a true reward function that measures the quality of a response given a prompt ; in practice, this reward function will be unknown and only accessible through some learned reward model . For the sake of simplicity, we will always assume that for some known . As in huang2025best, we will consider a simplified setting where the prompt is fixed throughout, and thus we will suppress it from notation for clarity, i.e., we will write instead of and similarly for and . Note that there is no loss of generality in doing so, as we can take expectations over the marginal distribution of prompts at the end of our analysis if desired.
We suppose that the learner has access to the following computational model, motivated by the fact that empirical LM inference engines like vLLM [kwon2023efficient] can quickly sample from large language models and evaluate reward models in parallel.
Definition 1 (Sample-and-Evaluate).
The learner has access to a reference model from which he can sample responses independently. In addition, for any sampled response , the learner can query the reward model to obtain the reward value . The efficiency of the learner is measured by the total number of samples, , drawn from .
The goal of the learner is to use this sample-and-evaluate access to produce a response that achieves high true reward while using as few samples from as possible. In order to evaluate candidate policies producing responses , it is natural to compare them to some comparator policy that achieves high true reward through regret. While huang2025best consider regret in terms of expected true reward, i.e., trying to minimize , we note that in many practical settings, the true reward is either (i) binary or (ii) accessible only through (potentially noisy) pairwise comparisons. In the former case, expected true reward drastically simplifies to a search problem and is tightly analyzed in huang2025best. In the latter case, however, the expected numerical value of the reward is less meaningful as the learner will never have access to itself. Instead, we consider the win-rate induced by of the learned policy against the comparator policy , defined to be:
More generally, could be replaced with another reward function, such as , and (2) would define the win-rate under that reward function. We remark that while (2) uses the base model from which we draw candidate samples, , as the comparator policy, in principle one could evaluate win-rate against an arbitrary comparison distribution . This latter setting is relevant in practice, as it corresponds to AlpacaEval-style pipelines [dubois2023alpacafarm, dubois2024length] where corresponds to a strong comparator like GPT-4. For the sake of simplicity and clarity of presentation, we will first present our results for the special case where , and then show that for general , under natural closeness assumptions between and , the same arguments yield qualitatively similar results, which we detail in Section˜6. It is immediate that expected rewards coincide (up to a constant factor) with the notion of win rate in the special case where all reward functions are binary. Given a comparator policy , we wish to minimize the regret of a candidate policy , i.e., . The fundamental question we ask is:
Within the sample-and-evaluate framework, how many samples from are necessary and sufficient to achieve low regret with respect to a given comparator policy and how should we select which output to return?
In order to answer this question, we have to better understand in what sense the reward model is close to the true reward and in what sense the reference policy is a good proxy for the comparator policy . We discuss these two questions in turn below.
2.2 In what sense is close to ?
Our first goal is to formalize the sense in which the learned reward model is close to the true reward . Critically, the reward model is trained on ‘typical’ outputs, which we formalize by assuming that is close to on samples drawn from . While huang2025best supposed that the squared error, is small, we argue that this is not the most appropriate metric in our setting for two reasons. First, squared error is not scale-invariant, i.e., multiplying by a positive constant does not change the behavior of any selection algorithm that uses to select outputs, but it does change the squared error. Second, assuming small squared error is somewhat unnatural when rewards are only accessible through pairwise comparisons. Indeed, there is a philosophical point to be made here: if rewards are only accessible through pairwise comparisons, then it is not clear that there is any meaningful ground-truth numerical reward function at all beyond the ordinal information it induces. Numerical reward functions are often trained by running Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) on pairwise comparison data assuming the Bradley-Terry model [bradley1952rank, rafailov2023direct], which is known to suffer sample complexity scaling exponentially in the maximum reward value333Indeed, it arises naturally as a simple calculation reveals that the maximum inverse Fisher information scales similarly. [rosset2024direct, xie2024exploratory]. Instead, we propose to measure the quality of through its pairwise win-rate error with respect to :
Here, quantifies the amount by which disagrees with on the outcome of two ‘typical’ responses sampled from . In particular, the absolute difference vanishes when and agree on the pairwise comparison outcome between and , is when one of the reward functions has a tie and the other does not, and penalizes disagreements between and that flip the win-versus-loss outcome with a full penalty of . This definition of is thus closely aligned wth the notion of win rate, which rewards strict wins more than ties. This alignment with the win-rate functional (which also half-counts ties and ranges between and ) hearkens back to our discussion on win-rate in Section˜1 and will prove to be important in our later analyses.
This metric is clearly scale-invariant and more closely matches the way reward models are trained in practice [ouyang2022training, rafailov2023direct, lambert2024tulu], suggesting that (3) may be a more reasonable quantity to expect controlled than . In the Bradley-Terry model, an elementary analysis shows that the tightest relationship between the two quantities scales exponentially in the maximum reward value, suggesting that when learning with finitely many samples from , we may expect . In general, however, is incomparable to as we show in Appendix˜A. Indeed, the scale invariance of immediately implies that there are examples where but is arbitrary. Another sense in which requiring to be small is a stronger assumption than requiring to be small is that we cannot recover small regret in terms of expected true reward from small (cf. Proposition˜3 in Appendix˜A), in marked contrast to small [huang2025best]; as we discussed above, in many situations, winrate is the more natural notion of reward.
2.3 In what sense is a good reference model?
In addition to the quality of as a proxy for , we must also consider the quality of the . Intuitively, if places much less mass on high-reward outputs than the comparator policy , then must be very large in order to obtain comparable performance to the comparator. Thus, any notion of sample complexity must depend on some measure of discrepancy between and . While prior work has supposed that is small, where we recall that is the -divergence between two distributions and , this assumption is somewhat ad hoc. Indeed, the requirement of small falls directly out of the assumption that is small due to the duality between -divergence and squared error; thus while natural in that context, there is no a priori reason to prefer -divergence over any other discrepancy measure. We instead propose to measure this discrepancy through the fundamental notion of -divergence [polyanskiy2010channel, block2023sample], where for any , we let
While the -divergence has many applications [polyanskiy2010channel, polyanskiy2025information], its relevance here stems from the fact that block2023sample demonstrated its intimate connection to the problem of approximate sampling: in order to generate samples from a target distribution using only samples from a reference distribution within tolerance (in total variation distance) , any algorithm requires at least samples from , where . Such a characterization is natural in the sample-and-evaluate framework of Definition˜1 because a natural skyline for our setting would be to approximately sample from using samples from and then return the sampled output, if the learner had access to knowledge of beyond that furnished by . Moreover, the -divergence is intimately related to the recently introduced notion of coverage [chen2025coverage], which has been fruitfully applied to understand LMs in a variety of settings. Coverage measures the tail discrepancy between two distributions and is defined for to be
It is straightforward to see that for all . More generally, -divergence is a special case of -divergences [polyanskiy2025information], defined for convex with to be
This family includes many well-known divergences, such as KL-divergence, Total Variation distance, and -divergence and a key result of block2023sample shows that for any such -divergence, we have .
With these notions of reward model and reference model quality in place, we may now refine our central question to be:
Within the sample-and-evaluate framework, how many samples from are necessary and sufficient to achieve low regret with respect to a given comparator policy as a function of the pairwise win-rate error and ?
3 Optimal Performance with Best-of-
In this section we begin answering the question posed at the end of Section˜2 by providing upper bounds on the win-rate regret achieved by the most naïve algorithm in the sample-and-evaluate framework, Best-of- (BoN):
The BoN algorithm in (7), introduced in [stiennon2020learning], simply pretends that and returns the sample with the highest predicted reward among i.i.d. draws from the reference policy . While BoN is susceptible to overoptimization, due to the fact that may not approximate on typical outputs drawn from even if it does so on typical outputs drawn from , the algorithm has seen widespread practical use. We have the following upper bound on the performance.
Theorem 3.
For any , reference model , comparator , ground truth reward , and learned reward model , it holds that
There are two terms in the upper bound (8). The first term quantifies the degree to which reward hacking occurs: as increases, the algorithm is more likely to select outputs on which and disagree. The second term quantifies the extent to which, even if , the BoN algorithm is able to find high-reward outputs comparable to those of the comparator using only samples from ; here the -divergence naturally arises as the relevant measure of discrepancy between and due to the connection between and approximate rejection sampling outlined in block2023sample. Applying a key lemma from that work relating -divergence to the -divergence (cf. Section˜2), we may further bound (8) by ; in the special case of -divergence, tuning , we get (up to a log factor) an optimal rate of of the regret, which bears at least cosmetic similarity to the results of huang2025best, although we emphasize that here we are considering win rate as opposed to expected reward. In the special case of binary rewards, however, expected reward becomes a special case of win rate (cf. Section˜2), and thus the above upper bound recovers the result of huang2025best in this setting.
In contradistinction to the case of expected reward, where BoN’s performance is suboptimal statistically, we find that BoN is in fact optimal for win-rate regret up to constant factors, as established by the following lower bound.
Theorem 4.
For any non-atomic , any in the sample-and-evaluate framework, and any , there exist reward functions , satisfying and a comparator policy for which
This result shows that unlike in the expected-reward setting, BoN is in fact optimal up to a logarithmic factor for win-rate regret within the sample-and-evaluate framework, which helps explain its widespread practical use despite its simplicity. This observation gently pushes back against the conclusion reached by huang2025best that observed that, when optimizing for expected reward, BoN is statistically suboptimal and more sophisticated algorithms are necessary to achieve optimal performance. As we have emphasized repeatedly, however, we believe that win rate is often a more natural objective than expected reward in many practical settings, and thus the suggestion that BoN should be avoided for being statistically suboptimal may be overstated. In addition to the statistical lower bound above, we also provide a complementary computational lower bound.
Proposition 1.
For any and , there exist reward functions and policies with such that within the sample-and-evaluate framework, any policy achieving regret must use at least samples from .
This bound is computational in the sense that if we did not care about computational efficiency (quantified by in the sample-and-evaluate framework), then it is trivial to achieve small regret with , as ; on the other hand, if we want to achieve small regret, then we have a strong lower bound on the number of samples required. We emphasize that this lower bound matches the upper bound of Theorem˜3 and thus BoN is computationally and statistically optimal for win-rate regret within the sample-and-evaluate framework.
4 Achieving Optimal Performance without Reward-Hacking
While in the previous section we saw that the naïve Best-of- algorithm given in (7) is computationally and statistically optimal for win-rate regret with optimally tuned , it is still susceptible to reward-hacking. That is, as increases, the algorithm is more likely to select outputs on which and disagree, leading to performance that scales non-monotonically in . While understandable, this is an unfortunate property, as in practice one would like to be able to increase to improve performance without worrying about overfitting to the reward proxy . In this section, we present a new algorithm, -regularized Best-of-, that is able to mitigate reward-hacking and achieve performance that is monotone in while still being statistically and computationally optimal.
Intuitively, we would like a policy that returns high-reward outputs without straying too far from the reference policy , as outputs that are unlikely under are more likely to be subject to reward-hacking. Our analysis and results from the previous section suggest that the appropriate way to measure discrepancy from is via the -divergence for an appropriate choice of , defined in (4). Motivated by this observation, we consider the following variational problem:
whose solution we refer to as the -regularized Best-of- policy. Note that it is perhaps not immediate that (10) is a desirable objective to consider; indeed, while a similar objective, with replaced by , was considered by huang2025best in the context of expected reward maximization, in our setting we do not care about the expected reward per se, but rather the win-rate. Another potential concern is that the variational problem in (10) is not easily sampled from within the sample-and-evaluate framework, as it is not immediately clear how to draw samples from the optimal policy . The second concern is allayed, however, by the following result, which shows that the optimal policy for (10) takes a particularly simple form.
Lemma 1.
Let be the -quantile of under , i.e. any value satisfying . Then the optimal policy solving (10) is given by .
Remark 1.
One might instead consider a different variation of (10), where is replaced by a general scaling parameter . If then this will end up having the same solution, but if then the solution can grow more complicated.
Lemma˜1 is proved in Section˜D.1, where we use Lagrange multipliers and convexity to derive a remarkably simple characterization of the optimal policy. Note that can be approximately sampled from within the sample-and-evaluate framework by drawing samples from and returning a sample uniform from the top- samples according to with randomized tie-breaking (cf. Appendix˜D); indeed, the total variation distance between this sampling procedure and is bounded by and can be interpreted as doing BoN for , but maintaining monotonicity as grows. We should emphasize that, in contrast to the procedure of huang2025best, is much simpler and does not require any additional estimation or rejection sampling. We have the following bound on the performance of this variant, which we call .
Theorem 5.
For any , reference model , comparator , ground truth reward , and learned reward model , it holds that
Note that the upper bound in (11) is very similar to that of BoN in Theorem˜3, with the key difference being that the scaling parameter is now decoupled from the regularization parameter . As a result, by tuning appropriately, we can achieve the performance skyline established in Theorem˜3 while maintaining monotonicity in . Other than monotonicity, the monotone algorithm performs similarly to BoN and we note that it still requires tuning of the regularization parameter , so we expect BoN to remain the dominant alignment algorithm when monotonicity is not required.
We conclude this section by observing that the only prior provably monotone algorithm, the -regularized Best-of- algorithm proposed by huang2025best, can fail to achieve optimal performance when win-rate regret is the goal. Specifically, we have the following result.
Proposition 2 (Separation between vs ).
For every , there exist policies , reward functions , and such that and it holds that
This result, whose proof is deferred to Section˜D.3, demonstrates that the -regularized Best-of- algorithm can perform much worse than our proposed algorithm. In addition to the poor performance demonstrated in Proposition˜2, we emphasize that one of the chief advantages of the algorithm proposed in this section over that of and alternatives such as soft-BoN [khalaf2025inference, verdun2025soft], running BoN with pessimistic reward estimates, and alternatives [jinnai2025regularized] is in its simplicity: the optimal policy takes the form of a simple top-quantile selector, which is easy to implement and sample from in practice and requires no online estimation or additional computational overhead.
5 Proof Techniques
Next, we provide proof sketches of our main results on the performance of BoN under win-rate regret (Theorems˜3 and 4) and an upper bound for the -regularized algorithm (Theorem˜5).
5.1 Proof Sketch of Theorem˜3
In order to compare the performance of to that of an arbitrary comparator policy under the true reward function , we need to overcome two main challenges: (1) if is too small and is far from , then we could pay in regret for not being able to find high-reward outputs comparable to those of ; and (2) if is too large, then we may overoptimize and select outputs on which and disagree. This tension is captured by the two terms in the upper bound (8), which arise out of the following regret decomposition holding for any : the regret is equal to the sum of three terms,
where is an intermediate comparator policy defined to be the policy that minimizes total variation distance to subject to the constraint that its density ratio relative to is upper bounded by almost surely. While a similar decomposition was introduced in huang2025best, the key challenge in our setting is that we are considering win-rate regret rather than expected-reward regret, which requires different techniques to control each of the terms in (13).
Term (i).
We further decompose
and control each of the two resulting differences separately. For the first difference, we observe that win-rate is bounded and thus -Lipschitz in total variation distance, so we can control the loss from to in terms of by block2023sample. For the second difference, we use the fact that the likelihood ratio of to is upper bounded by almost surely to control the pairwise win-rate error under between and by using change-of-measure.
Term (ii).
Here, we again adopt the formalism of approximate rejection sampling from block2023sample to define a selection rule to be a policy that approximates using only i.i.d. draws from . We again further decompose term (ii) as
and control each of the two resulting terms separately. For the first difference, we use the approximate rejection sampling analysis of block2023sample to show that approximates in total variation distance up to an exponentially small term in , which again transfers to win-rate by boundedness. For the second term, we observe that conditional on any fixed batch of samples from , BoN simply selects the output with the highest value, and thus dominates any other selection rule on that same batch under , including ; while this fact is intuitively true, we prove it rigorously in Appendix˜C.
Term (iii).
Finally, we control term (iii) using a similar change-of-measure argument as for term (i), observing that BoN has density ratio at most relative to almost surely and thus the pairwise win rate error under between and is at most .
Conclusion.
Combining the bounds for terms (i), (ii), and (iii) yields, for any ,
Setting then gives the desired upper bound.
5.2 Proof Sketch of Theorem˜4
Prior lower bounds for expected-reward regret [huang2025best] do not directly apply to win-rate regret, as they rely on constructing reward functions that differ on a small set of outputs with low probability under but high expected reward, which does not affect win rate significantly. Indeed, it is precisely because such constructions do not seriously affect win rate that BoN is able to achieve optimal performance for win-rate regret, in contrast to expected-reward regret. For fixed , , and , we construct a family of parameterized by measurable subsets such that differs from only on , i.e., . A computation shows that
so by choosing to have -measure at most , we ensure that the pairwise win rate error is small. A calculation tells us that with an appropriate choice of , we can lower bound
for any in the family. Thus, the regret is large if, subject to being small, we can ensure that is large while is small. We apply Markov’s inequality to show that
and then use the non-atomicity of to demonstrate the existence of an such that and . We then choose such that on and some small constant elsewhere to ensure that is a valid probability measure. For an appropriate choice of , we can use this instance to establish the lower bound.
5.3 Proof Sketch of Theorem˜5
We begin in a similar way as the proof of Theorem˜3 by considering a regret decomposition, i.e., the regret is equal to
where is the same as that defined in Section˜5.1. As such, term (i) is handled exactly as in the BoN proof, contributing . Similarly, term (iii) is also handled in the same way as in the BoN proof, except we have that has density ratio at most relative to almost surely (not increasing with , in contradistinction to BoN). It remains to control term (ii). We now decompose
where samples uniformly from the top quantile of for . The first difference is non-positive by a similar argument as in the BoN analysis (cf. Section˜D.2). To bound the second difference, we compute the win-rate of the empirical quantile policy and the population quantile policy explicitly: after tie-breaking, the -ranks of the samples are i.i.d. , so the win-rate of admits an explicit order statistic formula, yielding , while , so the difference is at most . The result follows.
6 Performance Under Win-rate Against an Arbitrary Policy
In this section, we extend our performance guarantees for BoN and -regularized BoN to the setting where win-rate is evaluated against an arbitrary comparison policy (rather than the baseline used in Equation˜2) as discussed in Section˜2.1. This generality aligns with common evaluation pipelines—for example, in AlpacaEval-style benchmarks [dubois2023alpacafarm, dubois2024length] one often measures win-rate against a strong comparator like GPT-4. Formally, for any comparison measure on and any reward function , we define the win-rate against by
This definition generalizes the win-rate in Equation˜2 (which corresponds to ) by drawing as the baseline comparator. Throughout this section we assume that is dominated by () with a pointwise density-ratio bound
for some constant . This condition lets us relate win-rate against to quantities (such as pairwise error and excess mass) that are defined with respect to via the same change-of-measure steps as in Sections˜5.1 and 5.3, up to a multiplicative factor . One could instead work with a weaker divergence control, e.g. , but we use (23) to keep the bookkeeping minimal. We continue to measure pairwise reward-model error with respect to via
The following result extends our BoN guarantee from the baseline comparison to an arbitrary comparison measure satisfying (23).
Theorem 6.
Suppose that and satisfy (23) and let . Then for any reward models and and any , it holds that
Theorem˜6 recovers Theorem˜3 in the case that ; more generally, we pay in regret for the mismatch between reference model and comparator through the uniform density ratio bound. This factor arises because the regret decomposition and subsequent change-of-measure steps are identical to the case (cf. Section˜5.1), except that expectations against are controlled by expectations against using (23). The remaining terms are bounded by the same approximate rejection sampling arguments from block2023sample, so BoN remains statistically and computationally optimal under win-rate regret, while still being susceptible to reward hacking through . As discussed in Section˜4, -regularized BoN overcomes this issue and decouples the scaling parameter from the regularization parameter and yields a monotone-in- guarantee for ; in the next theorem we extend an analogous guarantee for to general under (23).
Theorem 7.
For any , reference model , comparator , ground truth reward , and learned reward model , it holds that
Once again, we recover the case where from Theorem˜5 by setting , except we now have introduced an additional term that decays as . We emphasize that this is purely a computationaly phenomenon as, taking , we recover the same statistical rate as in Best-of-N above. In the special case when , the win-rate of a top- quantile policy under admits an explicit order-statistics calculation, yielding a fast dependence. For a general , the same top-quantile selection step must be analyzed through how places mass across -level sets near the cutoff; without additional structure, may concentrate its probability mass in a narrow band of scores around the quantile threshold, making the win-rate highly sensitive to small fluctuations in the empirical cutoff induced by a finite batch of samples. Thus, we control this step using concentration of empirical quantiles, which leads to the slower rate in . Finally, we note that the density-ratio bound in (23) is only one convenient way to relate win-rate against to quantities defined with respect to . We leave to future work the interesting question of the extent to which such a term is necessary in the general- setting, and whether one can recover a faster rate under additional regularity assumptions on .
7 Discussion and Related Work
In this work, we studied the problem of inference-time alignment within the sample-and-evaluate framework, focusing on the widely used Best-of- (BoN) algorithm. In contradistinction to prior work that focused on expected true reward as the objective of interest, we argued that win rate is often a more natural objective in practical settings where reward models are trained and evaluated using pairwise comparisons. We demonstrated that BoN is both statistically and computationally optimal within the sample-and-evaluate framework for achieving good win rate, partially explaining its widespread practical success despite its simplicity. Because BoN remains susceptible to reward-hacking even under the win-rate objective, we proposed a simple variant that provably eliminates reward-hacking while maintaining optimal statistical performance. Our work suggests several interesting directions for future research. First, we may ask if there is a unifying paradigm that captures both expected-reward and win-rate objectives as special cases, allowing us to better understand under what conditions (optimally tuned) BoN is optimal and when more sophisticated algorithms are necessary. Second, while we have focused on the sample-and-evaluate framework as a natural abstraction of inference-time alignment, it would be interesting to understand if similar statistical and computational guarantees can be achieved in more general frameworks that allow for adaptive sampling or other forms of interaction with the reference model. Finally, while our proposed variant of BoN eliminates reward-hacking in theory, it may still be too conservative in practice due to its reliance on information-theoretic guarantees; moving beyond such guarantees and leveraging the rich structure that learned representations provide in order to improve inference-time alignment remains an interesting question. We now discuss several related works in more detail.
Inference-time Alignment.
Inference time alignment is a popular framework for aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preferences without requiring expensive retraining [stiennon2020learning, nakano2021webgpt, wang2023pandalm, ouyang2022training, huang2025self, gui2024bonbon]. Both inference and training time alignment typically targets skills in reasoning, knowledge, or value alignment [jaech2024openai, guo2025deepseek, ouyang2022training, brown2024large], and has been successfully applied to a variety of tasks. The former domains often involve binary rewards, where an answer is either true or not, while the latter often involves more subjective human preferences that generally are measured through win rate [alpaca_eval, dubois2023alpacafarm, dubois2024length, ouyang2022training]. Our work focuses on the latter setting, where win rate is a more natural objective than expected reward.
Best-of-.
When the learner has access to a groundtruth verifier, brown2024large demonstrated that simply running a Best-of- (BoN) procedure with samples from the base model and selecting the output with the highest true reward is effective at producing high-quality outputs in a range of tasks. In practice, however, the groundtruth reward is not accessible, and instead a learned reward model is used to select among samples from the base model [stiennon2020learning, ouyang2022training, bai2022training]. While BoN with a learned reward model has seen widespread practical use, it is vulnerable to reward-hacking, which has been extensively explored [gao2023scaling, stroebl2024inference]. A number of ad hoc empirical mitigation attempts have been proposed, including regularization in representation space [jinnai2025regularized], a pessimistic BoN using empirical uncertainty quantification, and a KL-regularized variant of BoN [verdun2025soft, khalaf2025inference]. None of these approaches have theoretical guarantees that improve substantially over BoN. On the theoretical side, the most relevant work is that of huang2025best, which analyzed BoN under the expected-reward objective and demonstrated that it is statistically suboptimal in general due to its vulnerability to reward overoptimization. They then proposed a more sophisticated algorithm that achieves optimal statistical performance by leveraging ideas from approximate rejection sampling [block2023sample]. In contradistinction to their work, we demonstrated that BoN is in fact statistically and computationally optimal under the win-rate objective, which we believe is often more natural in practice. Thus, while conceptually similar, our results paint a more favorable picture of BoN than that of huang2025best and our techniques (in particular our lower bounds) differ significantly.
References
Contents
- 1 Introduction
- 2 Preliminaries and Problem Setup
- 3 Optimal Performance with Best-of-
- 4 Achieving Optimal Performance without Reward-Hacking
- 5 Proof Techniques
- 6 Performance Under Win-rate Against an Arbitrary Policy
- 7 Discussion and Related Work
- References
- A Investigation of Different Notions of Error and Performance
- B Supporting Lemmas
- C Proofs for Best-of-
- D Proofs for Monotone Algorithms
- E Proofs under win-rate against an arbitrary comparison policy
Appendix A Investigation of Different Notions of Error and Performance
In this section, we demonstrate that the pairwise error and squared error as defined in Section˜2.2 are generally incomparable. In particular, Lemma˜2 shows that small does not imply small , while Lemma˜3 shows the converse. In addition, we provide a proof of Proposition˜3, which shows the impossibility of bounding expected reward regret as a function of the pairwise error and excess mass divergence introduced in Section˜2.3 uniformly across all problems.
A.1 Proofs for Reward Model Error Comparison
Lemma 2.
Fix a base policy . For all there are unbounded reward models and with
Proof.
Recall the pairwise outcome
and the pairwise error
The key observation is that the pairwise misranking loss is invariant under strictly increasing transformations: if for a strictly increasing , then for i.i.d. ,
hence . Instantiating this with the strictly increasing map (for any ), i.e. , we have for every . Meanwhile,
Choosing any with nonzero second moment under and letting to grow arbitrarily large yields the desired result. ∎
Lemma 3.
Let and pick any . For every , there exist a response space , a reference policy on , a true reward , and a reward model such that
and the reward has nontrivial scale:
In particular, for fixed and , the MSE vanishes while stays and stays .
Proof.
Fix . Define the response space
Define the reference policy as: with probability draw ; with probability draw where . Define the true reward by
Let be independent of , and define
so that is randomized conditional on . For pairwise comparisons, use independent for .
Mean squared error.
Conditioned on , we have , so
and hence .
Pairwise error lower bound.
Recall the pairwise outcome
and the pairwise error
Let and consider the event
which has probability . On we can write , with , and take independent . Define the true gap and predicted gap
On , by continuity, and is also continuous so . Hence, almost surely on ,
and therefore on . If , then so the absolute difference is . If (which occurs w.p. ), then dominates since . Hence on ,
Moreover, is symmetric and independent of , hence
Therefore,
Reward variance (scale).
Let . By the law of total variance,
We have and , hence
Also, and , so . Therefore
∎
A.2 Proof of Proposition˜3
To construct a lower bound on expected reward regret, we will make assign the same maximal score to a high-scoring region of -mass , so that any alignment algorithm has no information to distinguish points inside and can only pick some distribution over . We then define to place all its value on the part of that selects least (while keeping and small), forcing a large true-reward regret. For completeness, we first restate the theorem before providing a proof.
Proposition 3.
Fix a threshold . For any inference-time algorithm and for every there exists an instance with unbounded rewards and a comparator policy such that
while, for every target gap ,
By taking , one can make the regret arbitrarily large while simultaneously having and .
Proof.
Define . We construct to be non-atomic and supported on two disjoint measurable regions and with and . Precisely, let and be disjoint measurable sets, each equipped with a non-atomic probability measure. Define the reward model
Let denote the (possibly randomized) policy output by when run on input . Fix . Because is constant on , the algorithm has no score-based signal to distinguish points within and may concentrate arbitrarily on some subset of . We therefore choose a region adversarially as an -mass subset that captures as much of ’s mass as possible:
Note that because is non-atomic and , there exist measurable subsets of of any prescribed -mass in . An exact maximizer need not exist; any achieving the supremum up to an arbitrarily small slack suffices. Also, define as well, so . Since is (approximately) maximal among -mass subsets of , its -mass is at least the average -mass over an fraction of :
Now we can let the true reward be maximized on the rest of by setting
for some to be chosen later, so that and then . Next, we compute . The density ratio equals on and elsewhere. Since , we have on , and therefore
We must also ensure that the pairwise error is small. Recall the pairwise outcome
and the pairwise error
In our construction, is constant on and is constant on each of . Thus except for when exactly one of falls in and the other falls in . Moreover, when and (or vice versa), we have (a tie under ) while (a strict comparison under ), and when and (or vice versa) we have (a tie under ) while (a strict comparison under ). In all these cases, . Therefore,
Above, we chose with so that
Then, since is on and elsewhere,
Therefore,
Finally, for any target , choosing gives (50).
∎
Appendix B Supporting Lemmas
The lemmas in this section provide key auxiliary results used throughout the rest of the proofs. Lemma˜4 quantifies the win-rate penalty incurred when transferring between reward models, and provides good intuition for maneuvering the regret decomposition in the upper bounds. It is here where the alignment between the pairwise error and win-rate defintions is useful: we can translate control of pairwise outcome disagreements into control of win-rate differences. Lemma˜5 demonstrates the relationship between our win-rate metric and the expected quantile under achieved by a policy under a fixed reward model.
Lemma 4.
Fix a reference policy , a true reward , and a learned reward model . For any policy with density ratio and any ,
Proof.
For any score function , we defined the pairwise outcome
Then by definition, the win-rate functional can be written as
In addition, recall the pairwise error
In order to bound the win-rate difference, we first observe that
For shorthand, let . We can change measure using :
Then, we can decompose and use :
∎
Lemma 5.
Fix a reward model . Define the mid-CDF transform
where
Then for any policy ,
Moreover, let be independent of everything, and define the randomized uniformized score
Then:
-
1.
For any , .
-
2.
If , then .
Proof.
By the law of total expectation,
Fix . Then
and
Plugging these two identities into the previous display yields (81).
Finally, we prove when . Let and write
so that conditional on , is uniform on the interval . Fix any and define the generalized inverse
By definition of , we have and
Now decompose according to :
-
•
If , then , hence .
-
•
If , then , hence .
-
•
If , then by construction, is uniform on , so
Therefore,
Since this holds for all , we conclude . ∎
Appendix C Proofs for Best-of-
This section gives proofs for the guarantees of Best-of- in Section˜3. The results in this section build on the guarantees for approximate rejection sampling as mentioned in Section˜5.1, and are organized as follows:
-
1.
Section˜C.1 provides a general upper bound on the regret of BoN in terms of the -divergence introduced in Section˜2.3, and in Section˜C.2 we give a general lower bound on regret.
-
2.
In Section˜C.3 we provide a lower bound to demonstrate the computational efficiency of BoN.
The proof of Theorem˜3 below makes use of the approximate rejection sampling analysis of block2023sample. We briefly remind the reader that, given a base distribution and a target policy with density ratio , classical rejection sampling draws and accepts it with probability ; if -a.s., then the accepted sample is exactly distributed as (neumann1963various). When is not uniformly bounded, the same accept/reject rule truncates the target: mass in regions where cannot be fully realized and is effectively “clipped” at level . Running this procedure for proposals (returning a default proposal if no acceptance occurs) and sufficiently large induces a policy that approximates in total variation, with error controlled by the clipped mass plus an exponentially small failure-to-accept term (block2023sample; see Lemma˜8).
C.1 Proof of Theorem˜3
Proof.
As detailed in Section˜5.1, in order to compare to an arbitrary comparator under the true reward , we need to balance two competing effects: if is too small, BoN may fail to find responses comparable to those favored by ; if is too large, BoN may overfit to and pick outputs where and disagree. These two effects correspond exactly to the two terms in the upper bound (8), and they appear via the following regret decomposition, which holds for any : the regret is equal to the sum of three terms,
where is an intermediate comparator policy that is a closest -capped approximation to in total variation:
To bound , we can further decompose
and control each of the two resulting terms separately. For the first difference, we observe that win-rate is bounded and thus -Lipschitz in total variation distance (it can be written as an expectation of the mid-CDF as in Lemma˜5), so we can control the loss from to in terms of by block2023sample: Lemma˜6 shows that no policy with bounded density ratio can achieve total variation distance to less than itself, and Lemma˜7 demonstrates that the total variation distance between and as defined above is less than , so , and hence
For the second difference, we use the fact that the likelihood ratio of to is upper bounded by almost surely to control the pairwise win rate error under between and . Specifically, we have -a.s., hence and applying Lemma˜4 with and truncation yields
Putting these together, we have
To bound , we introduce another intermediate comparator in order to utilize the optimality of under on a fixed batch of i.i.d. samples from . Adopting the formalism of approximate rejection sampling from block2023sample, we define a selection rule to be a policy that approximates using only i.i.d. draws from ; it returns the first accepted , and if no acceptance occurs it returns . We again further decompose as
and control each of the two resulting terms separately. For the first difference, we use the approximate rejection sampling analysis of block2023sample to show that approximates in total variation distance up to an exponentially small term in , which again transfers to win-rate by boundedness. Thus
where the second inequality follows from Lemma˜8, and the last equality holds because is -capped, so . To bound the second difference, we observe that conditional on any fixed batch of samples from , BoN simply selects the output with the highest value, and thus dominates any other selection rule on that same batch under , including . To make this concrete, we first apply Lemma˜5 to rewrite win-rate under as an expectation of , so that
We can now appeal to the optimality of under . Below, we use to refer to expectations over samples drawn from , and, given , we use to refer to the expectation over responses induced by running approximate rejection sampling conditioned on the realization of the set drawn by the algorithm; we define analogously. We can then use the linearity of expectation, so that
couples the set drawn by the two algorithms, and compares the performance of and for a fixed set of responses. Then, because the BoN policy always chooses a response with the largest value under for any fixed , and is nondecreasing, we have for all . Therefore,
Combining these steps gives
Finally, we control using a similar change-of-measure argument as for . Before applying Lemma˜4 again, we first show that BoN has density ratio at most relative to , and thus the pairwise win-rate error under between and is at most . Let denote the sequence of i.i.d. draws from , and write
Since conditioned on , the BoN algorithm outputs a single element of deterministically (via the fixed tie-breaking rule), we can write in closed form as
Next, express by marginalizing over and then sampling an index uniformly from :
Combining (110) and (111), for any with we have
Thus pointwise, and by definition,
Now we can apply Lemma˜4 to with truncation such that
Combining all the preceding bounds, we obtain
Setting and observing that for such , it holds that , we obtain the desired result. ∎
Lemma 6 (Lemma 32 in block2023sample).
Fix and assume with density ratio . Then for any whose density ratio satisfies -a.s., we have
Lemma 7.
Fix and assume with density ratio . Then there exists a policy such that -a.s., and
Proof.
Define the clipped density
Using pointwise and , we get
Thus has total mass but is not yet a valid probability density when , so we must add back the excess mass while ensuring that the density ratio is still bounded. Define the slack under :
Since pointwise, we have
If , we set and and we are done. Otherwise we define
Then -a.s. and . Now we define via
We can verify that normalization holds:
In addition, the pointwise density ratio bound still holds: if then and , so and ; if then and , so . Hence . Finally, we compute the total variation distance using densities:
Pointwise,
because on we have and , while on we have . Taking expectations gives
hence , which implies the stated upper bound. ∎
The following lemma (which is originally adapted from Theorem 3 in block2023sample) contains sample complexity upper bounds for the approximate rejection sampling procedure detailed in block2023sample. We refer to huang2025best for a detailed discussion of this result.
Lemma 8 (Lemma D.4 in huang2025best).
For any valid policy , and , let be the law of responses induced by running approximate rejection sampling. Then
C.2 Proof of Theorem˜4
We first restate the theorem for the sake of completeness, after which we provide the proof.
Theorem 8.
For any non-atomic , any in the sample-and-evaluate framework, and any , there exist reward functions , satisfying and a comparator policy for which
for some universal constant .
Proof.
We build a hard instance in three steps. First, we identify a large-probability region on which cannot overweight by more than a constant factor; inside we carve out a small set whose -mass is on the order of the pairwise-error budget where . Next, we choose a simple reward pair so that the algorithm cannot reliably distinguish from while still meeting the pairwise-error budget. Then, we let upweight by a factor of on , which forces . Since the regret is proportional to in our instance, we will relate this regret to the skyline objective.
First, we construct a small set on which has small mass. Fix any sample-and-evaluate algorithm . Let so that . By Markov’s inequality,
so satisfies . Set
Since is non-atomic and , choose a measurable with . Then
We set in this way for two reasons: first, the comparator we construct below will place density on , so feasibility requires , i.e. . In addition, we will enforce the pairwise-error budget by choosing no larger than under the pairwise error, as we will see next. Define
Intuitively, makes the uniquely desirable region, while a constant provides no signal about membership in , so any reliable preference for must come from chance rather than information. For any reward function , recall the pairwise outcome
and the pairwise error
Since is constant, . Under , we have and iff exactly one of lies in . Thus
Next, we construct and evaluate the skyline objective. Define via
Note that since and , we have , hence . Then , so is a valid policy and
Moreover, for any ,
Hence for such ,
Next, we can explicitly compute the win-rate and regret. Fix any policy and write . Using the definition of win-rate under :
Subtracting for and cancels the tie-mass term, yielding
Combining (147) with (141) and (135) gives
Finally, we relate the regret to the skyline objective. We consider two regimes.
Case 1: . Then , and (143) gives, for all ,
In particular,
Indeed, for , so ; thus the infimum over equals . Combining with (148), for ,
Case 2: . Then , so (148) yields
with . On the other hand, for any , we have , so using ,
Thus . Taking uniformly completes the proof. ∎
C.3 Proof of Proposition˜1
Proof.
Fix . We construct a hard instance in which the optimal policy must place all its weight on a subset of , and show that any algorithm in the sample-and-evaluate framework requires on the order of samples to sample from this subset and avoid suffering constant regret. Let and let be . Define
Set , so . Let so that and hence . Moreover, a.s. under , and w.p. under , so
Let be the samples and let be ’s output. By the sample-and-evaluate framework, almost surely. In addition, define the event . On we have for all , hence deterministically and therefore
Using (155), on we obtain
Since regret is nonnegative, taking expectations yields
If the expected regret is at most , then the above implies
When , the RHS is , so taking logs on both sides gives
For , we can apply with , yielding
∎
Appendix D Proofs for Monotone Algorithms
This section gives proofs for the guarantees in Section˜4, and are organized as follows:
-
1.
Section˜D.1 provides a derivation of the optimal policy to the -regularized variation problem, which is introduced in Section˜4.
-
2.
Section˜D.2 provides a general upper bound on the regret of monotone algorithm in terms of the -divergence introduced in Section˜2.3, matching the skyline lower bound on regret.
-
3.
In Section˜D.3 we provide a separation result between -regularized BoN and the only other provably monotone algorithm: the solution to the -regularized variational problem as analyzed in huang2025best. Importantly, this highlights the weaknesses of previous approaches under a win-rate regret goal.
D.1 Derivation of -Regularized BoN Policy
Throughout this section, we fix a measurable score function on a finite ; similar arguments apply to any bounded score range and infinite response space. Consider the -regularized variational problem parameterized by :
which is equivalently the functional optimization over :
Lemma 9.
Proof.
Define the primal objective
Since is finite, this is a finite-dimensional convex program: the penalty term is concave, so is concave in , and the constraints are affine. Slater’s condition holds because is strictly feasible ( for all and ), so strong duality applies. Next, we introduce a scalar Lagrange multiplier for the constraint . The Lagrangian is
For fixed , the maximization over separates over : for each we maximize, over ,
This is a 1D piecewise-linear problem. Writing ,
Hence:
-
•
If for some , then (the branch has positive slope), so the dual function is infinite. Therefore any dual-optimal must satisfy
-
•
Under this condition, the branch has nonpositive slope, so its maximizers can be chosen at . Thus, for every , there exists a maximizer of lying in . In other words: for any with finite dual value, the inner maximization can be restricted to .
By strong duality, there exists a primal optimizer that attains the (finite) dual optimum at some , and by the pointwise conclusion above we may choose for every . For such a , we have for all , hence and
Therefore, the optimal value of (165) equals the optimal value of (166), i.e., we may restrict attention (without loss) to policies whose density ratios satisfy -a.s.; moreover, an optimizer exists within this restricted class. ∎
With this simplification in hand, we may work directly with the equivalent density-ratio program (166). Since the problem is convex and strong duality holds, we can characterize the optimizer by the KKT conditions, which are necessary and sufficient for optimality [boyd2004convex]. We now apply these conditions to derive the optimal policy. In the following proposition, we assume for the sake of simplicity that there exists a threshold so that exactly; otherwise one can randomize inclusion on the boundary set to make the selected -mass exactly , without affecting optimality.
Proposition 4.
Proof.
We solve (166) via the Lagrangian/KKT conditions. Introduce a scalar multiplier for the equality constraint , and pointwise multipliers and for the inequality constraints and , respectively. The Lagrangian is
The KKT conditions at an optimum are:
(i) Primal feasibility: and .
(ii) Dual feasibility: and -a.s.
(iii) Stationarity (pointwise): for -a.s. ,
(iv) Complementary slackness:
We now deduce the threshold structure. Fix and consider three cases.
Case 1: . Then complementary slackness forces and , and (179) gives .
Case 2: . Then may be nonzero, while (since implies by slackness). Thus (179) becomes , so .
Case 3: . Then may be nonzero, while (since implies ). Thus (179) becomes , so .
Putting the three cases together yields the pointwise characterization:
Then the density ratio of the optimizer satisfies
Finally, enforce the normalization :
so . Then the induced policy is precisely . ∎
D.2 Proof of Theorem˜5
Proof.
Fix and let . Recall that is the (unconditional) law of the random output produced by: sample and i.i.d. independent; let index the top- samples under the lexicographic order ; output with uniform on conditional on . To compare the performance of to that of an arbitrary comparator , we proceed in a similar fashion to the proof of Theorem˜3 in Section˜C.1 by considering the following regret decomposition:
As in the proof of Theorem˜3, is an intermediate comparator policy defined to be the policy that minimizes total variation distance to subject to the constraint that its density ratio relative to is upper bounded by almost surely. To bound , we can further decompose into
and control each of the two terms separately. For the first difference, we can simply invoke Lemma˜4, which states that for any policy ,
Applying this with yields
For the second difference, as in the proof of Theorem˜3, we observe that win-rate is bounded and thus -Lipschitz in total variation distance (it can be written as an expectation of by Lemma˜5), so we can control the loss from to in terms of by block2023sample: Lemma˜6 shows that no policy with bounded density ratio can achieve total variation distance to less than itself, and Lemma˜7 demonstrates that the total variation distance between and as defined above is less than , so , and hence
Putting these together, we have
Next, to bound , we again decompose further as
Here, we introduce another intermediate comparator , the solution to the -regularized variational problem (10) and the “idealized” version of which selects uniformly from a top- tail under . To make this concrete, we derive the solution to (10) in Proposition˜4 with , writing the resulting threshold as so that exactly. Thus, the optimizer has bounded density ratio of the form
-a.s. and is the -quantile of under , so the optimal policy is the top- threshold policy
Now, for the first difference, recall that by Lemma˜5 we can rewrite . Since is non-decreasing, (output by Proposition˜4 with ) maximizes over the class of policies with density ratio bounded by . Recalling that is also subject to this constraint, it follows that , and hence
We now bound the second difference by directly comparing the win-rate of the ideal top- threshold policy to that of our implementation . A convenient way to analyze when may have ties is to “forget the scale” of and work with a randomized quantile that induces a strict total order under . Letting and be as in Lemma˜5, and given an auxiliary seed independent of , we define
Indeed, is exactly the randomized CDF value: it is strictly increasing in , and on a tie it reduces to an independent linear interpolation over the CDF jump at , so ordering by is the same as ordering by . Then for and independent, Lemma˜5 shows that , and moreover the win-rate under can be realized as a strict comparison of these randomized quantiles: for any (possibly randomized) output ,
(Indeed, if the inequality agrees with by monotonicity, while if then iff , which occurs with probability .) Recalling that uses uniform tie-breaking as described in the beginning of the proof, under (194), ranking by is equivalent to ranking by , and . Thus, we compute via uniform order statistics in Lemma˜11, which implies the lower bound
Next, we calculate the win-rate of the ideal top- quantile policy . This should be intuitive, as under , the draw lies in the -upper tail of of mass , so against an independent it wins whenever (which happens with probability ), and ties occur exactly when also falls in the same tail (probability ), contributing a factor under our win-rate convention. Lemma˜10 formalizes this intuition and gives
assuming feasibility of as we did in Proposition˜4. Combining (196) and (197) yields
Thus, we have
Finally, to bound , we will first show that before applying Lemma˜4 to . Let be measurable. Conditional on , the algorithm outputs with , hence
Therefore and its density ratio satisfies
Since , we have and hence . Thus -a.s., so
Applying Lemma˜4 to yields
Combining all the preceding bounds yields
∎
Lemma 10.
Let and with . Let . Then
Proof.
Fix and let , , and . Then, for , always. To compute the win-rate of , we can split on the event that :
Next, we condition on the event , which is implied by the events in the last two terms in the equation above. Let
By exchangeability, the events and have the same conditional probability, and together with ties they partition the conditional sample space, hence , implying . Therefore, by Bayes’ Theorem,
Finally, note that
Plugging in gives
∎
Lemma 11.
Fix and integer , and let . Then the win-rate of against under is
Proof.
Let and be as in Lemma˜5, and define the randomized quantile
Set . The randomized-PIT argument provided in Lemma˜5 gives
Moreover, by construction, ordering the indices by is equivalent to ordering them by (since ties in are broken by , which exactly corresponds to the interpolation inside each CDF jump).
Let denote the algorithm output and define . Introduce an independent “opponent” draw and independent of everything, and write . Then
where the last step uses independent of .
Now condition on the realized batch and be the order statistics. Since is uniform over the top- indices (under the -ranking),
Taking expectations and using for order statistics gives
Since , when , we in fact have
∎
D.3 Proof of Proposition˜2
We first describe the hard instance construction before stating the formal separation result and proof.
Hard instance setup.
Fix a target constant and choose parameters and with . For any , define and , and let the reference distribution be supported on three outcomes with masses
so for all ). Define the score function by
and the true reward by
Recall for reward function the pairwise outcome
and the pairwise reward-model error
In our construction, and induce no ties except when , in which case ; hence . Since while , the only strict-order disagreements occur exactly when one draw is and the other is in . Therefore,
Since the above expression is increasing on and our setup assumes , it follows that
Finally, the two policies to be compared are the top- quantile policy under and the family of solutions (parametrized by ) to the -regularized variational problem.
Proof sketch.
Before stating the formal result, we first provide intuition for why this example creates a separation. The construction creates a spurious top-score spike of tiny reference mass that looks best under but is worst under , alongside a near-top outcome of mass that is truly optimal. The must spread its mass over , so it only pays a regret proportional to the unavoidable contamination fraction . In contrast, the -regularized solution reweights proportionally to the score gap , so it overconcentrates on the spike whenever has even a slight score advantage over (controlled by ), inducing an additional regret term that cannot be tuned away uniformly over . Thus, in order to increase the constant factor win-rate regret gap between the two policies prescribed by a fixed , we would like to increase the score gap by decreasing and increasing the total-mass of the top-quantile , both as a function of .
Proposition 5.
For every target constant , there exist with and , and an defined by , such that for every , there exists a hard instance of the form in the above setup for which
The range for above is implied by the constraint based on our construction. Moreover, for any target we may choose the unique obtained by inverting (232). Since , achieving larger requires choosing smaller (hence smaller ) to keep . In the proof below, we first solve for the explicit form of each policy before comparing performance and concluding a separation result.
Proof.
Fix . Recall from huang2025best that the -regularized solution admits the pointwise form
where is chosen so that , i.e.
Enforcing normalization.
Solving for .
Before calculating an explicit form of , we identify three regimes for the policy based on the values of . We solve (237) by cases, according to where falls relative to , , and .
Case I: . Then and , while , so
This case is self-consistent iff , i.e. equivalently
Case II: . Then , while both and , so
Hence
Self-consistency requires and . The first is
and the second is . So Case II holds for
Case III: . Then all three ReLU terms are active: , , , so
Self-consistency is exactly
Finding the explicit form of .
Recall with
and given by the previous case analysis. We now record the resulting in each -regime.
Regime I (): here , so only is active:
while . Thus
Regime II (): here , so is inactive and are active:
Therefore
Regime III (): here , so all three actions are active. For and we have
and for we have
Therefore, for and ,
and for ,
Using this explicit formulation of in these three regimes, we next compute the win-rate exactly.
Computing .
For each region recall the definition of win-rate as:
By construction , , , so ties occur only when . Hence,
Therefore, for any policy supported on ,
We now plug in the mass of in each regime given in (249)–(254).
Computing .
On this instance (with ), the top- set under is exactly , so
Using the values for and and plugging into (260), we obtain
Equivalently, since , this can be written more transparently as
Rewriting in this way will prove to be useful when comparing policies in regret. Now that we have the win-rates for each policy, we can compute the regret against the best policy on this instance.
Computing win-rate regret.
Since is strictly optimal under , we take the benchmark policy to be . Thus,
For compactness, we define the win-rate regret by
Regret of . Using (271) and , the regret of the top-quantile selector is
Regime I (). From (262), , hence
Regime II (). From (265), , so
where in the last line we used (from (251)). In particular, comparing to (274),
The second term above is the additional penalty induced by tilting: even though only needs to include a fraction of the poisoned spike , the solution incurs an extra loss proportional to the score gap and inversely proportional to the regularization parameter , matching our intuition in the hard instance setup.
Regime III (). Although we already showed how to calculate the win-rate in this regime in (266), we will now show a simpler method that is more amenable to our casework. In this regime we have , hence for all ,
and therefore
Plugging into the win-rate formula in (260) gives
where the constant depends only on the instance (and not on ). Indeed, one can easily verify this by rearranging (266). Thus, for ,
Consequently, using the regret definition (273) with benchmark , for all ,
which is affine in .
Comparing regrets across regimes.
Recall from (274) that
and from (273) that with . We will now lower bound by analyzing each -regime.
Regime II (). From (278),
which is decreasing in , hence minimized at :
Dividing by (289) gives
Using (from ),
where we used and in the second inequality. Plugging into (295) yields . Since is decreasing in on Regime II, for all we have
Regime III (). From (288),
so is affine in over . Hence the minimum over is attained at an endpoint:
The first endpoint is already lower bounded by from Regime II. It remains to lower bound the second endpoint, which is . Under the half-ties convention, by symmetry of i.i.d. draws,
Therefore,
where the last inequality follows from by construction. On the other hand, using again,
where the last inequality uses . Hence . Plugging into (299) gives for all .
Concluding the separation. Combining the three regimes yields
as claimed. ∎
Appendix E Proofs under win-rate against an arbitrary comparison policy
In this section, we provide proofs for the upper bounds on the performance of BoN and -regularized BoN when win-rate is compared against an arbitrary measure . This section is organized as follows:
-
1.
Section˜E.1 provides a modified win-rate transfer lemma introduced in Appendix˜B under win-rate against , under a bounded density ratio assumption between and .
-
2.
Section˜E.2 provides a general upper bound on the regret of BoN in terms of the -divergence introduced in Section˜2.3, with a new baseline comparator policy for win-rate.
-
3.
In Section˜E.3, we give a general upper bound on the regret of our implementation of the -regularized BoN policy under the win-rate against an arbitrary .
Before proceeding to the proofs, recall from Section˜6 that we defined the win-rate against by
This definition generalizes the win-rate definition against in Equation˜2, where we now draw to compare against a random sample from our policy. We will assume throughout this section that , and
for some constant . We continue to measure pairwise reward-model error with respect to via
E.1 Transfer lemma for win-rate against
Lemma 12 (Win-rate transfer against ).
Fix , satisfying (305), a true reward , and a learned reward model . For any policy with density ratio and any ,
where .
E.2 Proof of Theorem˜6
Next, we provide a proof of the upper bound on the regret of the BoN policy when win-rate is comparing against an arbitrary measure . Optimizing the following bound in the same way that we did for the -win-rate case yields the same result as Theorem˜3 up to constant factors.
Theorem 9.
Under the pointwise bound on the density ratio of in (305), for any , reference model , comparator , ground truth reward , and learned reward model , it holds that
Proof.
We follow the proof of Theorem˜3 detailed in Section˜C.1, replacing with . In particular, for any , the same regret decomposition holds:
where is the same -capped TV projection defined in (96). To bound , we decompose as in Section˜C.1:
The first difference is controlled exactly as before: for fixed , the win-rate functional is bounded and therefore -Lipschitz in total variation. Thus,
where the equality uses the same arguments from block2023sample as in the proof of Theorem˜3. For the second difference, apply Lemma˜12 with ; since , we have , and thus
Therefore,
Next, in order to bound , we introduce the same approximate rejection sampling selection rule as in Section˜C.1 and decompose
The first difference is controlled exactly as before by the approximate rejection sampling analysis of block2023sample, using only boundedness of win-rate:
since . For the second difference, conditional on any fixed batch , BoN outputs an index attaining . We define
so that for any policy , by conditioning on exactly as in Lemma˜5. From this, it is clear that is nondecreasing in . Therefore, for any we have , and the same coupling argument as in the proof of Theorem˜3 gives
Combining the bounds on the two differences ensures
To bound , recall that in Section˜C.1 we showed that BoN satisfies pointwise, so . Applying Lemma˜12 with and truncation yields
Combining (319), (324), and (325) with (315) gives
Setting and observing that for such , it holds that , we obtain the desired result. ∎
E.3 Proof of Theorem˜7
Finally, we provide an upper bound on the regret of the -regularized BoN policy when win-rate is comparing against an arbitrary measure . We again work under the assumption that the density ratio of is bounded pointwise (305). Note that while the following bound is qualitatively similar to the result from Theorem˜3, we obtain a slower rate in while staying minimax optimal.
Theorem 10.
For any , reference model , comparator , ground truth reward , and learned reward model , it holds that
Proof.
Fix and let . Recall that is the (unconditional) law of the random output produced by: sample and i.i.d. independent; let index the top- samples under the lexicographic order ; output with uniform on conditional on . As in the proof of Theorem˜5 with -win-rate, we consider the same regret decomposition:
Here, is defined exactly as before: it minimizes total variation distance to over all such that -a.s. To bound , we decompose
For the first difference, we apply Lemma˜12 to obtain
For the second difference, we observe that for fixed the win-rate functional is bounded and therefore -Lipschitz in total variation. Thus,
where the last equality uses the same approximate rejection sampling arguments from block2023sample as before. Combining,
For , as before, we introduce the ideal top- threshold policy
so that , and we decompose as
For the first difference, as in the proof of Theorem˜9, we define
so that for any policy , by conditioning on exactly as in Lemma˜5. From this, it is clear that is nondecreasing in , so (output by Proposition˜4 with ) maximizes over the class of policies with density ratio bounded by . Recalling that is also feasible subject to this constraint, it follows that , and hence
It remains to bound . As in Section˜D.2, we let and denote the cumulative density functions of with as in Lemma˜5, and given an auxiliary seed independent of , we define
By the same uniformization argument as in Lemma˜5, , and moreover
-a.s., where is the generalized inverse. As in the proof of Theorem˜5, ranking by is equivalent to ranking by . We let denote these randomized ranks, and write . Now we set and define the empirical cutoff (so the selected set corresponds to the top ranks). We also define the bounded monotone function
so that . Under , we have , and hence
where and . Under , the output rank is uniform over the top ranks. Following the same logic as Lemma˜11, a standard order-statistic property implies that conditional on , the multiset of the ranks above is i.i.d. ; therefore and
where the expectation is over the randomness in . At this point we have reduced the gap to
To upper bound this quantity, we note that it is immediate that
Recall with and . Equivalently, if we write , then . Hence for any ,
We next show how to bound this total variation distance. Assume wlog . The corresponding densities are
so
Therefore, for all ,
Applying this with and yields
since and . Hence
Hence
and it remains to bound . Since , the cutoff has the Beta law . In particular,
We can decompose using the triangle inequality as
and using Cauchy-Schwarz on the second term, we obtain
Since and , one can easily verify that (due to rounding) and , yielding
Combining with (352) gives
and hence we can conclude that
where the second term dominates for large . For , as in the proof of Theorem˜5, we have since -a.s. Applying Lemma˜12 to under (305) yields
Finally, combining (332), (358), and (359) gives
∎
While we do not provide a computational lower bound proving that the estimation term is tight in full generality, this slower rate can be viewed as an artifact of the general- setting. The key obstruction is that for general the win-rate becomes a generic tail functional of the randomized -rank rather than an explicitly computable linear statistic as in the proof of Theorem˜3 in Section˜C.1. Concretely, we write
where is merely bounded (and monotone) under (305). When , the corresponding transform is linear (indeed ), which is why the empirical top- policy admits an exact order-statistics calculation and yields a term. For general , however, the shape of near the fixed cutoff is uncontrolled: can place almost all of its variation in an neighborhood of . In such worst cases, small fluctuations of the empirical cutoff around can translate into a sensitivity bound of the form
which holds for all bounded and captures the fact that changing the threshold by perturbs a tail of mass . Since fluctuates around at scale for , this leads to an estimation error on the order of without additional regularity assumptions on (equivalently, on ) beyond (305).

KAYNAK : https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.05739