--- google_ai | Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite: Built for intelligence at scale | score=91.68 ---
Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite: Built for intelligence at scale
Today, we're introducing Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite, our fastest and most cost-efficient Gemini 3 series model. Built for high-volume developer workloads at scale, 3.1 Flash-Lite delivers high quality for its price and model tier.
Starting today, 3.1 Flash-Lite is rolling out in preview to developers via the Gemini API in Google AI Studio and for enterprises via Vertex AI.
Cost-efficiency without compromise
Priced at just $0.25/1M input tokens and $1.50/1M output tokens, 3.1 Flash-Lite delivers enhanced performance at a fraction of the cost of larger models. It outperforms 2.5 Flash with a 2.5X faster Time to First Answer Token and 45% increase in output speed, according to the Artificial Analysis benchmark while maintaining similar or better quality. This low latency is needed for high-frequency workflows, making it an ideal model for developers to build responsive, real-time experiences.
Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite outperforms 2.5 Flash in speed and quality.
3.1 Flash-Lite achieves an impressive Elo score of 1432 on the Arena.ai Leaderboard and outperforms other models of similar tier across reasoning and multimodal understanding benchmarks, including 86.9% on GPQA Diamond and 76.8% on MMMU Pro–even surpassing larger Gemini models from prior generations like 2.5 Flash.
Adaptive intelligence at scale for developers
Beyond its raw performance, Gemini 3.1 Flash-Lite comes standard with thinking levels in AI Studio and Vertex AI, giving developers the control and flexibility to select how much the model “thinks” for a task, which is critical for managing high-frequency workloads. 3.1 Flash-Lite can tackle tasks at scale, like high-volume translation and content moderation, where cost is a priority. And it can also handle more complex workloads where more in-depth reasoning is needed, like generating user interfaces and dashboards, creating simulations or following instructions.
3.1 Flash-Lite instantly fills an e-commerce wireframe with hundreds of products in different categories.
3.1 Flash-Lite can generate dynamic weather dashboards in real-time, using live forecasts and historical data.
3.1 Flash-Lite creates a SaaS agent capable of executing versatile, multi-step tasks for a business.
3.1 Flash-Lite can analyze and sort large numbers of content like images quickly.
Early-access developers on AI Studio and Vertex AI, and companies like Latitude, Cartwheel and Whering are already using 3.1 Flash-Lite to solve complex problems at scale. Early testers highlighted 3.1 Flash-Lite’s efficiency and reasoning capabilities, saying it can handle complex inputs with the precision of a larger-tier model, plus follow instructions and maintain adherence.
We look forward to seeing what you build with 3.1 Flash-Lite and the rest of the Gemini 3 series models.

KAYNAK : https://blog.google/innovation-and-ai/models-and-research/gemini-models/gemini-3-1-flash-lite/

--- google_ai | Create new worlds in Project Genie with these 4 tips | score=43.49 ---
Learn more about Google DeepMind’s Project Genie and how to write prompts to create your own worlds.

KAYNAK : https://blog.google/innovation-and-ai/models-and-research/google-deepmind/tips-prompt-writing-project-genie/

