--- mit_ai | Nurturing agentic AI beyond the toddler stage | score=83.85 ---
Parents of young children face a lot of fears about developmental milestones, from infancy through adulthood. The number of months it takes a baby to learn to talk or walk is often used as a benchmark for wellness, or an indicator of additional tests needed to properly diagnose a potential health condition. A parent rejoices over the child’s first steps and then realizes how much has changed when the child can quickly walk outside, instead of slowly crawling in a safe area inside. Suddenly safety, including childproofing, takes a completely different lens and approach.
Generative AI hit toddlerhood between December 2025 and January 2026 with the introduction of no code tools from multiple vendors and the debut of OpenClaw, an open source personal agent posted on GitHub. No more crawling on the carpet—the generative AI tech baby broke into a sprint, and very few governance principles were operationally prepared.
The accountability challenge: It’s not them, it’s you
Until now, governance has been focused on model output risks with humans in the loop before consequential decisions were made—such as with loan approvals or job applications. Model behavior, including drift, alignment, data exfiltration, and poisoning, was the focus. The pace was set by a human prompting a model in a chatbot format with plenty of back and forth interactions between machine and human.
Today, with autonomous agents operating in complex workflows, the vision and the benefits of applied AI require significantly fewer humans in the loop. The point is to operate a business at machine pace by automating manual tasks that have clear architecture and decision rules. The goal, from a liability standpoint, is no reduction in enterprise or business risk between a machine operating a workflow and a human operating a workflow.
CX Today summarizes
the situation succinctly: “AI does the work, humans own the risk,” and   California state law (AB 316), went into effect January 1, 2026, which removes the “AI did it; I didn’t approve it” excuse.  This is similar to parenting when an adult is held responsible for a child’s actions that negatively impacts the larger community.
The challenge is that without building in code that enforces operational governance aligned to different levels of risk and liability along the entire workflow, the benefit of autonomous AI agents is negated. In the past, governance had been static and aligned to the pace of interaction typical for a chatbot. However, autonomous AI by design removes humans from many decisions, which can affect governance.
Considering permissions
Much like handing a three-year-old child a video game console that remotely controls an Abrams tank or an armed drone, leaving a probabilistic system operating without real-time guardrails that can change critical enterprise data carries significant risks.  For instance, agents that integrate and chain actions across multiple corporate systems can drift beyond privileges that a single human user would be granted. To move forward successfully, governance must shift beyond policy set by committees to operational code built into the workflows from the start.
A humorous meme around the behavior of toddlers with toys starts with all the reasons that whatever toy you have is mine and ends with a broken toy that is definitely yours.  For example, OpenClaw delivered a user experience closer to working with a human assistant;, but the excitement shifted as
security experts
realized inexperienced users could be easily compromised by using it.
For decades, enterprise IT has lived with shadow IT and the reality that skilled technical teams must take over and clean up assets they did not architect or install, much like the toddler giving back a broken toy. With autonomous agents, the risks are larger: persistent service account credentials, long-lived API tokens, and permissions to make decisions over core file systems. To meet this challenge, it’s imperative to allocate upfront appropriate IT budget and labor to sustain central discovery, oversight, and remediation for the thousands of employee or department-created agents.
Having a retirement plan
Recently, an acquaintance mentioned that she saved a client hundreds of thousands of dollars by identifying and then ending a “zombie project” —a neglected or failed AI pilot left running on a GPU cloud instance. There are potentially thousands of agents that risk becoming a zombie fleet inside a business. Today, many executives encourage employees to use AI—or else—and employees are told to create their own AI-first workflows or AI assistants. With the utility of something like OpenClaw and top-down directives, it is easy to project that the number of build-my-own agents coming to the office with their human employee will explode. Since an AI agent is a program that would fall under the definition of company-owned IP, as a employee changes departments or companies, those agents may be orphaned. There needs to be proactive policy and governance to decommission and retire any agents linked to a specific employee ID and permissions.
Financial optimization is governance out of the gate
While for some executives, autonomous AI sounds like a way to improve their operating margins by limiting human capital, many are finding that the ROI for human labor replacement is the wrong angle to take. Adding AI capabilities to the enterprise does not mean purchasing a new software tool with predictable instance-per-hour or per-seat pricing. A December 2025
IDC survey
sponsored by Data Robot indicated that 96% of organizations deploying generative AI and 92% of those implementing agentic AI reported costs were higher or much higher than expected.
The survey separates the concepts of governance and ROI, but as AI systems scale across large enterprises, financial and liability governance should be architected into the workflows from the beginning. Part of enterprise class governance stems from predicting and adhering to allocated budgeting. Unlike the software financial models of per-seat costs with support and maintenance fees, use of AI is consumption and usage costs scale as the workflow scales across the enterprise: the more users, the more tokens or the more compute time, and the higher the bill. Think of it as a tab left open, or an online retailer’s digital shopping cart button unlocked on a toddler’s electronic game device.
Cloud FinOps was deterministic, but generative AI and agentic AI systems built on generative AI are probabilistic.
Some
AI-first
founders
are realizing that a single agents’ token costs can be as high as $100,000 per session. Without guardrails built in from the start, chaining complex autonomous agents that run unsupervised for long periods of time can easily blow past the budget for hiring a junior developer.
Keeping humans in the loop remains critical
The promise of autonomous agentic AI is acceleration of business operations, product introductions, customer experience, and customer retention. Shifting to machine-speed decisions without humans in and or on the loop for these key functions significantly changes the governance landscape. While many of the principles around proactive permissions, discovery, audit, remediation, and financial operations/optimizations are the same, how they are executed has to shift to keep pace with autonomous agentic AI.
This content was produced by Intel. It was not written by MIT Technology Review’s editorial staff.

KAYNAK : https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/03/16/1133979/nurturing-agentic-ai-beyond-the-toddler-stage/

--- mit_ai | Where OpenAI’s technology could show up in Iran | score=81.21 ---
This story originally appeared in The Algorithm, our weekly newsletter on AI. To get stories like this in your inbox first,
sign up here
.
It’s been just over two weeks since OpenAI reached a controversial agreement to allow the Pentagon to use its AI in classified environments. There are still pressing questions about what exactly OpenAI’s
agreement
allows for; Sam Altman said the military can’t use his company’s technology to build autonomous weapons, but the agreement really just demands that the military follow its own (quite permissive)
guidelines
about such weapons. OpenAI’s other main claim, that the agreement will prevent use of its technology for domestic surveillance, appears equally
dubious
.
It’s unclear what OpenAI’s motivations are. It’s not the first tech giant to embrace military contracts it had once vowed never to enter into, but the speed of the pivot was notable. Perhaps it’s just about money; OpenAI is spending lots on AI training and is on the hunt for more revenue (from sources including
ads
). Or perhaps Altman truly believes the ideological framing he often invokes: that liberal democracies (and their militaries) must have access to the most powerful AI to compete with China.
The more consequential question is what happens next. OpenAI has decided it is comfortable operating right in the messy heart of combat, just as the US escalates its strikes against Iran (with AI
playing a larger role
in that than ever before). So where exactly could OpenAI’s tech show up in this fight? And which applications will its customers (and employees) tolerate?
Targets and strikes
Though its Pentagon agreement is in place, it’s unclear when OpenAI’s technology will be ready for classified environments, since it must be integrated with other tools the military uses (Elon Musk’s xAI, which recently struck its own deal with the Pentagon, is expected to go through the same process with its AI model Grok). But there’s pressure to do this quickly because of controversy around the technology in use to date: After Anthropic refused to allow its AI to be used for “any lawful use,” President Trump ordered the military to stop using it, and Anthropic was designated a supply chain risk by the Pentagon. (Anthropic is fighting the designation in court.)
If the Iran conflict is still underway by the time OpenAI’s tech is in the system, what could it be used for? A recent
conversation
I had with a defense official suggests it might look something like this: A human analyst could put a list of potential targets into the AI model and ask it to analyze the information and prioritize which to strike first. The model could account for logistics information, like where particular planes or supplies are located. It could analyze lots of different inputs in the form of text, image, and video.
A human would then be responsible for manually checking these outputs, the official said. But that raises an obvious question: If a person is truly double-checking AI’s outputs, how is it speeding up targeting and strike decisions?
For years the military has been using another AI system, called Maven, which can handle things like automatically analyzing drone footage to identify possible targets. It’s likely that OpenAI’s models, like Anthropic’s Claude, will offer a conversational interface on top of that, allowing users to ask for interpretations of intelligence and recommendations for which targets to strike first.
It’s hard to overstate how new this is: AI has long done analysis for the military, drawing insights out of oceans of data. But using generative AI’s advice about which actions to take in the field is being tested in earnest for the first time in Iran.
Drone defense
At the end of 2024, OpenAI announced a
partnership
with Anduril, which makes both drones and counter-drone technologies for the military. The agreement said OpenAI would work with Anduril to do time-sensitive analysis of drones attacking US forces and help take them down. An OpenAI spokesperson told me at the time that this didn’t violate the company’s policies, which prohibited “systems designed to harm others,” because the technology was being used to target drones and not people.
Anduril provides a suite of counter-drone technologies to military bases around the world (though the company declined to tell me whether its systems are deployed near Iran). Neither company has provided updates on how the project has developed since it was announced. However, Anduril has long trained its own AI models to analyze camera footage and sensor data to identify threats; what it focuses less on are conversational AI systems that allow soldiers to query those systems directly or receive guidance in natural language—an area where OpenAI’s models may fit.
The stakes are high. Six US service members were killed in Kuwait on March 1 following an Iranian drone attack that was not intercepted by US air defenses.
Anduril’s interface, called Lattice, is where soldiers can control everything from drone defenses to missiles and autonomous submarines. And the company is winning massive contracts—
$20 billion from the US Army just last week
—to connect its systems with legacy military equipment and layer AI on them. If OpenAI’s models prove useful to Anduril, Lattice is designed to incorporate them quickly across this broader warfare stack.
Back-office AI
In December, Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth started encouraging millions of people in more administrative roles in the military—contracts, logistics, purchasing—to use a new AI tool. Called GenAI.mil, it provided a way for personnel to securely access commercial AI models and use them for the same sorts of things as anyone in the business world.
Google Gemini was one of the first to be available. In January, the Pentagon announced that xAI’s Grok was going to be added to the GenAI.mil platform as well, despite incidents in which the model had spread antisemitic content and created nonconsensual deepfakes. OpenAI followed in February, with the company announcing that its models would be used for drafting policy documents and contracts and assisting with administrative support of missions.
Anyone using ChatGPT for unclassified tasks on this platform is unlikely to have much sway over sensitive decisions in Iran, but the prospect of OpenAI deploying on the platform is important in another way. It serves the all-in attitude toward AI that Hegseth has been pushing relentlessly across the Pentagon (even if many
early users
aren’t entirely sure what they’re supposed to use it for). The message is that AI is transforming every aspect of how the US fights, from targeting decisions down to paperwork. And OpenAI is increasingly winning a piece of it all.

KAYNAK : https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/03/16/1134315/where-openais-technology-could-show-up-in-iran/

--- mit_ai | Securing digital assets against future threats | score=77.35 ---
In partnership withLedger
Securing digital assets against future threats
AI-enabled fraud and the coming impact of quantum computing are redefining digital-asset security, putting pressure on owners and service providers to act now.
Cryptocurrency thieves are getting creative. Taking advantage of the desire to learn more about crypto and banking on the digital assets’ reputation as a way to get rich quick, AI-generated video tutorials are touting ways of make money from crypto-trading arbitrage — purportedly teaching viewers how to create maximal extractable value from trades using smart contracts.
Yet, they are often scams, a subtle social engineering approach known as mentorship pretexting. In one case, a fraudster shifted more than $900,000 from victims’ accounts to their own wallets. AI chatbots and large language models have allowed the scammers to be more convincing as well: In 2025, about 60% of all inflows into scammers’ crypto wallets came from AI-powered scams, according to cryptocurrency intelligence firm Chainalysis.
In 2025, about 0% of all inflows into scammers' crypto wallets came from AI-powered scams
Source: Compiled by MIT Technology Review Insights, based on data from Chainalysis, 2026
Two major technological advances—AI and quantum computing—are the impetus for significant innovation across industries. Unfortunately, the cybercriminal ecosystem is no different.
Cybercriminals' experimentation with AI, the threat quantum computing poses to encrypted data, and the rapid adoption of digitized value are resulting in massive changes, says Ian Rogers, chief experience officer at Ledger, a provider of secure signer platforms.
“We have lived through the ‘once in humanity’ digitization of all information, and now we are living through the ‘once in humanity’ digitization of all value,” he says. “And I would say, we may all have a bit of whiplash from the internet, but you ain’t seen nothing yet.”
The ubiquity of AI and continuing advances in quantum computing will transform the security landscape and change what companies and users need to safeguard their digital assets. Quantum computing poses challenges for the cryptocurrency ecosystem, especially for those areas not updated to use post-quantum cryptography, while AI lowers the barriers to creating synthetic identities and convincing fake information.
“We have lived through the ‘once in humanity’ digitization of all information, and now we are living through the ‘once in humanity’ digitization of all value,” he says. “And I would say, we may all have a bit of whiplash from the internet, but you ain’t seen nothing yet.”
The impact? Unless companies and digital-asset owners adopt more stringent security, they face more advanced threats and risks to their portfolios.
Disruption, but when?
As demonstrated by the mentorship scam, AI already poses a threat to technology users. A variety of other AI-augmented attacks have popped up as well. Attackers use AI code generators to produce variations on their tools, often successfully evading malware detectors and antivirus software. In one instance, a cybercrime group known as GreedyBear generated 150 wallet extensions for Firefox using AI code-generators. The malicious campaign stole more than $1 million from users.
“As a user, it is very difficult to know if you are interacting with a human or with a bot,” he says. “How do you know that you are, today, interacting with me and that I’m a human? Because it’s already quite easy for AI to impersonate me.”
Increasingly, AI is being used to masquerade as executives at companies or create synthetic identities for fraud. The attacks are often very convincing, even fooling tech-savvy victims, says Charles Guillemet, chief technology officer at Ledger.
“As a user, it is very difficult to know if you are interacting with a human or with a bot,” he says. “How do you know that you are, today, interacting with me and that I’m a human? Because it’s already quite easy for AI to impersonate me.”
The threat posed by quantum computing to encrypted data is real, but it’s still in a future state. For example, it’s likely a quantum computer capable of storing a million qubits is needed to break today’s commonly used public-key encryption. However, even with accelerated investment in research and development a practical quantum computer will only be deployable in the next decade or two.
However, while practical quantum computing may not be here today, sensitive data needs to start being protected now. Far-sighted crypto thieves—not to mention nation-state threat actors—can collect high-value data today in the expectation that the data will remain valuable when it can be decrypted in a decade. The scheme, known as “harvest now, decrypt later, ” means that today’s most valuable data needs to use post-quantum encryption to protect against the future development of a practical quantum computer.
“It’s not that easy to evaluate the threat,” says Guillemet. “However, the good news is that we have a solution to this threat.”
The entire cryptocurrency ecosystem needs to adopt post-quantum cryptographic algorithms to protect asset owners from these future threats. The EU and US are already moving to require quantum-resistant crypto by 2035. Ecosystem companies, such as Ledger, are creating tools to make post-quantum security easier to adopt and to prove authenticity of digital assets.
Next-generation identity is needed
With these rapidly evolving technologies threatening the ecosystem, the boundaries between identity protection and asset security continue to blur. Securing both identity and assets has become vital. As the trend toward the digitization of all value continues, cryptocurrency-technology providers need to innovate in both identity and privacy. Security alone is not enough; users and companies need better identity and privacy as well.
“If we’re doing cryptocurrency, then we need self-custody, and if we have self-custody, then we need security,” he says. “It doesn’t matter if it’s on the user side, the organizational side, or the government side — somebody is going to hold those tokens, and while stealing a billion in gold bars is very difficult, stealing a billion in cryptocurrency is easy.”
Self-custody and permissionless value are necessary for the future but make security hard. Cryptocurrencies are predicated on the principle of self-custody—meaning a user, not a third-party, holds the keys that secure them in a digital wallet—and they require no permission to use. However, these characteristics also mean that, if stolen, that value is irretrievably lost.
These attributes mean that cryptosecurity providers need to continue to innovate, says Rogers.
“If we’re doing cryptocurrency, then we need self-custody, and if we have self-custody, then we need security,” he says. “It doesn’t matter if it’s on the user side, the organizational side, or the government side — somebody is going to hold those tokens, and while stealing a billion in gold bars is very difficult, stealing a billion in cryptocurrency is easy.”
When a third party, such as a cryptocurrency exchange, is the custodian for an owner’s digital assets, proving identity is critical. With the potential for AI to make spoofing users or stealing users’ digital identities easier, and quantum computing potentially undermining some legacy crypto systems, identity also needs to have well-tested security, says Guillemet.
“Cryptography is the answer,” he says. “If I can authenticate myself and authenticate my content, then you will have the strong guarantee that you are talking to me and that I’m a human.”
Securing the next-generation economy
A major difference between digital assets and physical assets is that bits are easily copied, whereas atoms require more effort. As such, security decisions must be made today to prepare for tomorrow’s digital-based economies. As a start, post-quantum encryption algorithms must be adopted at all levels of the cryptocurrency ecosystem, and at least a decade before a viable quantum computer is built.
Security is a chain, and it’s never stronger than the weakest link. Most of the time this link is the user, which is why the cryptocurrency marketplace’s de facto mantra is “Do your own research.” Security technology needs to be simple and train the user by default, so they can make the right decision and avoid signing away their assets.
Cryptosecurity firms need to innovate both in security and in user experience to help users make the right decision. The latest hardware wallets display critical information on secure screens before allowing the user to sign a transaction, such as the Transaction Check feature of Ledger wallets, which often helps warn a user if something seems amiss. The user does not have to try to understand what kind of transaction they’re signing, but they are still protected.
“We are working on our next-generation devices, and we are making sure they will be post-quantum-crypto ready,” he says. “We will have this capability on the newer generations.”
Another Ledger initiative, known as Clear Signing, aims to present all the relevant details of a transaction before the asset owner signs the contract, says Guillemet. “We are working on our next-generation devices, and we are making sure they will be post-quantum-crypto ready,” he says. “We will have this capability on the newer generations.”
Cybercriminals do not rest and are constantly innovating, he adds. While the timing of the arrival of certain threats are uncertain, the fact that they will arrive is not. Almost every consumer relies on their smartphone for security, but in the future, the security of those devices may not be enough. Guillemet stresses, “So we are talking about next generation, but I think it's already here and we can't wait. This is what we need to prepare for the future.”
Learn more about how to secure digital assets in the Ledger Academy.
This content was produced by Insights, the custom content arm of MIT Technology Review. It was not written by MIT Technology Review’s editorial staff. This content was researched, designed, and written by human writers, editors, analysts, and illustrators. This includes the writing of surveys and collection of data for surveys. AI tools that may have been used were limited to secondary production processes that passed thorough human review.

KAYNAK : https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/03/16/1134287/securing-digital-assets-against-future-threats/

